THE CODE OF OUR LORD, THE MOST HOLY EMPEROR JUSTINIAN.
SECOND EDITION.


BOOK II.

TITLE I. CONCERNING THE BRINGING OF AN ACTION

TITLE II. CONCERNING THE SUMMONS TO COURT

TITLE III. CONCERNING INFORMAL AGREEMENTS

TITLE IV. CONCERNING COMPROMISES

TITLE V. CONCERNING ERRORS IN CALCULATION

TITLE VI. CONCERNING LITIGATION

TITLE VII. CONCERNING THE ADVOCATES OF DIFFERENT TRIBUNALS

TITLE VIII. CONCERNING THE ADVOCATES OF DIFFERENT JUDGES

TITLE IX. CONCERNING THE ADVOCATES OF THE TREASURY

TITLE X.  CONCERNING THE ERRORS OF ADVOCATES AND THOSE WHO DRAW UP
PETITIONS OR APPLICATIONS

TITLE XI. THE JUDGE MUST SUPPLY ANYTHING WHICH THE ADVOCATES OF THE
PARTIES HAVE OMITTED

TITLE XII. IN WHAT CASES INFAMY IS INCURRED

TITLE XIII. PAGE CONCERNING ATTORNEYS

TITLE XIV.  PERSONS IN AUTHORITY ARE NOT PERMITTED TO APPOINT
ADVOCATES FOR LITIGANTS, OR TO HAVE THEIR RIGHTS OP ACTION TRANSFERRED
TO THEM

TITLE XV.  CONCERNING THOSE WHO PLACE UPON THEIR LANDS PAPERS BEARING
THE NAMES OF POWERFUL PERSONS, OR WHO MAKE USE OF THE NAMES OF SUCH
PERSONS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

TITLE XVI.  No PRIVATE PERSON SHALL PLACE THE IMPERIAL INSIGNIA UPON
HIS OWN PREMISES OR UPON THOSE OF ANOTHER, OR SHALL RAISE THE IMPERIAL
STANDARD OVER THEM

TITLE XVII.  No ONE SHALL BE PERMITTED TO PLACE A SEAL UPON PROPERTY
BELONGING TO ANOTHER, WITHOUT THE AUTHORITY OF A JUDGE

TITLE XVIII.  NEITHER THE TREASURY NOR THE STATE SHALL PROVIDE AN
ATTORNEY TO DEFEND ANYONE IN COURT

TITLE XIX. CONCERNING THE ACTION BASED ON VOLUNTARY AGENCY

TITLE XX.  CONCERNING ACTS PERFORMED THROUGH THE INFLUENCE OF FORCE OR
FEAR   {{{{ ======= TITLE XIX ...? }}}}

TITLE XXI. CONCERNING FRAUD .............................................. 221

TITLE XXII.
CONCERNING COMPLETE RESTITUTION GRANTED TO MINORS OF THE AGE OF TWENTY-FIVE
YEARS ....................................... 223

TITLE XXIII.
CONCERNING COMPLETE RESTITUTION IN THE CASE OF A MINOR UNDER PARENTAL CONTROL
.......................................... 224

TITLE XXIV. CONCERNING THE SURETIES OF MINORS ..............................
225

TITLE XXV.
WHERE A GUARDIAN OR A CURATOR INTERPOSES TO OBTAIN COMPLETE RESTITUTION
................................................. 225

TITLE XXVI.
WHERE COMPLETE RESTITUTION OF PROPERTY OWNED IN COMMON IS DEMANDED
.................................................. 226
TITLE XXVII.
WHERE RESTITUTION IS DEMANDED IN A CASE IN WHICH A DECISION HAS BEEN RENDERED
............................................. 227
TITLE XXVIII. CONCERNING RESTITUTION ON ACCOUNT OF A SALE ...................
228
TITLE XXIX. WHERE RESTITUTION IS DEMANDED ON ACCOUNT OF THE SALE OF PLEDGES.
229
TITLE XXX. WHERE RESTITUTION IS DEMANDED ON ACCOUNT OF A DONATION ....... 229
TITLE XXXI. WHERE RESTITUTION IS DEMANDED ON ACCOUNT OF A GRANT OF FREEDOM. 230
TITLE XXXII.
WHERE A MINOR APPLIES FOR COMPLETE RESTITUTION AGAINST A COMPROMISE OR A
DIVISION OF PROPERTY ........................... 231
TITLE XXXIII.
WHERE RESTITUTION IS DEMANDED ON ACCOUNT OF PAYMENT MADE BY THE GUARDIAN OF A
MINOR OR BY HIMSELF ..................... 231
TITLE XXXIV. WHERE RESTITUTION IS DEMANDED AGAINST A DOWRY ................ 232
TITLE XXXV.
WHERE A MINOR APPLIES FOR RESTITUTION ON ACCOUNT OF A CRIME COMMITTED BY HIM
.............................................. 232
TITLE XXXVI.
WHERE A MINOR DEMANDS RESTITUTION BY WAY OF RELIEF AGAINST USUCAPTION
................................................. 233
TITLE XXXVII.
WHERE A MINOR DEMANDS RESTITUTION BY WAY OF RELIEF AGAINST THE TREASURY
................................................... 233
TITLE XXXVIII.
WHERE A MINOR DEMANDS RESTITUTION BY WAY OF RELIEF AGAINST A CREDITOR
.................................................... 234
TITLE XXXIX. WHERE A MINOR REJECTS AN ESTATE .............................. 234
TITLE XL.
WHERE A MINOR DEMANDS RESTITUTION FOR THE PURPOSE OF OBTAINING AN ESTATE WHICH
HE HAS REJECTED, OR THE POSSESSION OF PROPERTY OR ANYTHING ELSE
..................................... 235
TITLE XLI. IN WHAT INSTANCES COMPLETE RESTITUTION Is NOT NECESSARY ...... 235
TITLE XLII. PAGE
WHO CANNOT OBTAIN COMPLETE RESTITUTION, AND AGAINST WHOM IT CANNOT BE OBTAINED
........................................ 237
TITLE XLIII. WHERE A MINOR ALLEGES THAT HE IS OF AGE .......................
238
TITLE XLIV. WHEN COMPLETE RESTITUTION IS DEMANDED MORE THAN ONCE ....... 239
TITLE XLV.
CONCERNING THOSE WHO OBTAIN A RELEASE FROM THE DISABILITY OF NON-AGE
.................................................... 239
TITLE XLVI.
WHERE A MINOR RATIFIES HIS ACT AFTER HAVING ATTAINED HIS MAJORITY
......................................................... 241
TITLE XLVII.
WHERE, AND BEFORE WHAT JUDGE APPLICATION FOR COMPLETE RESTITUTION SHOULD BE
MADE ....................................... 241
TITLE XLVIII.
CONCERNING REFLECTIONS MADE IN A JUDGMENT FOR COMPLETE RESTITUTION
........................................................ 242
TITLE XLIX.
PROCEEDINGS TO OBTAIN COMPLETE RESTITUTION CAN ALSO BE INSTITUTED BY AN
ATTORNEY ....................................... 243
TITLE L.
No NEW PROCEEDING TAKES PLACE WHEN A DEMAND FOR COMPLETE RESTITUTION IS MADE
......................................... 243
TITLE LI.
CONCERNING THE RESTITUTION OF SOLDIERS AND OF PERSONS WHO ARE ABSENT ON
BUSINESS FOR THE STATE ........................... 243
TITLE L1I.
CONCERNING THE WIVES OF SOLDIERS AND OF THOSE WHO ARE ABSENT ON BUSINESS FOR
THE STATE .................................. 245
TITLE LIII.
CONCERNING THE TIME DURING WHICH MINORS AND OTHER PERSONS, AS WELL AS THEIR
HEIRS, WHO HAVE A RIGHT TO COMPLETE RESTITUTION, CAN OBTAIN IT
........................................ 245
TITLE LIV.
FOR WHAT REASONS PERSONS WHO HAVE ATTAINED THEIR MAJORITY OBTAIN COMPLETE
RESTITUTION ............................... 248
TITLE LV.
CONCERNING AN ALIENATION MADE FOR THE PURPOSE OF CHANGING AN
ACTION ..................................................... 249
TITLE LVI. PAGE CONCERNING THE APPOINTMENT OF ARBITERS ........................
250
TITLE LVII. CONCERNING THE FURNISHING OF SECURITY ......................... 253
TITLE LVIII.
CONCERNING THE SUPPRESSION OF FORMULAS AND CLAIMS, OR RIGHTS OF ACTION
..................................................... 254
TITLE LIX. CONCERNING THE TENDER OF THE OATH WITH REFERENCE TO CALUMNY. 254


BOOK II.

TITLE I. CONCERNING THE BRINGING OF AN ACTION.
1. The Emperor Antoninus Pius to Aemilius.
You, yourself, must ascertain the proof necessary to establish the fact that
you are entitled to the money which you allege you have deposited, for your
demand that your adversary produce his accounts cannot be conceded; as to order
this is the exclusive duty of the judge, after proper cause has been shown.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Sabinus,
Consul for the second time, and Severus, 156.
2. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Faustus.
He before whom proceedings are brought shall order public documents, both civil
and criminal, to be produced, for the purpose of being examined, in order to
ascertain the truth.
Given on the Nonesof July, during the Consulate of Severus and Albinus, 193.
3. The Same to Valens.
An action having been begun only presents the image of the future proceeding,
as it can either be amended or changed in accordance with the authority of the
Perpetual Edict, or when equity permits the court to grant it.
Given on the second of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Severus, Consul for the third time, and Antoninus, 203.
4. The Emperor Antoninus to Epaphroditus.
Persons who wish to bring an accusation must have the evidence, for neither law
nor equity permits that power be granted to inspect the documents of the other
side. Therefore, if the plaintiff does not prove his allegations, the defendant
shall be discharged, even if he himself furnishes no evidence.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof March, during the Consulate of the two Aspers,
223.
5. The Emperor Alexander to Valentiniana.
It is not new for a party from whom money is demanded in a suit to ask that the
accounts of his creditor be produced, in order to establish the truth of the
claim.
Given on the seventh of the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Aelianus, 224.
6. The Same to Uranius.
It is but just that the request of. him, against whom an action to collect
money is brought, should be granted to permit him to examine the public
records, after their production, so as to ascertain how much has been paid in
his name, even where the Government is plaintiff.
Given on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Maximus, Consul for the second time, and Aelianus, 224.
7. The Same to Valens.
The Agent of Our Private Affairs shall, as is customary, order that you be
given authority to take copies of instruments in which you say both you and the
Treasury are interested; and if the case should require any of them to be
proved before another judge in order to establish the truth of your claim, and
the party against whom the action is brought desires that the originals be
produced, the Agent aforesaid shall order this to be done.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof March, under the Consulate of Fuscus and
Dexter, 226.
Extract from Novel 119, Chapter HI. Latin Text.
Where anyone in one document refers to another, no attention ought to be paid
to this unless the document alluded to in the second one is produced, or some
other evidence of the amount of the debt is given, because the original sum of
which mention is made is considered to be correct. This rule is found in the
ancient laws.
8. The Same to Florus.
The Rescripts published by the Divine Antoninus, My Father, and Myself, conform
to the principles of law and equity, as they are not different from, or
contrary to one another; for a great distinction exists between a party who
brings an action for a claim, who can be barred from recovery by an exception
on the ground of fraud, when the defendant desires accounts to be produced by
which he alleges that he can protect himself, which the justice of the case
itself requires; and where the plaintiff demands evidence to be produced by the
party who is sued for the claim, when, in this instance, it is not proper that
the prayer of the petition should be established by instruments belonging to
him against whom suit was brought.
Given during the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Fuscus and Dexter,
226.

TITLE II. CONCERNING THE SUMMONS TO COURT.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Trophinius.
The rules of ordinary courtesy demand that respect be shown by a freedman to
the wife of the person who manumitted him; hence he is forbidden to summon her
to court, even when this is necessary, without obtaining the consent of the
Praetor.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Agricola
and Clamentinus, 231.
2. The Emperor Gordian to Nocturnus.
The law is perfectly clear on the point that where the benefit of the Edict is
not invoked, a patron or a patroness, their parents, their children, and also
their heirs, even if they are strangers, cannot be summoned to court by their
freedmen, or the children of the latter; nor in a case of this kind can
ignorance be alleged as an excuse, since in accordance with natural reason,
honor is due to persons of this description. Therefore, when you acknowledge
that you have summoned the son of your patron to court without previously
obtaining the permission of the Governor, you will, in vain, ask to be exempted
from the penalty prescribed by the Perpetual Edict by virtue of a rescript
which has been given you.
Given on the eighth of the Idesof November, during the Consulate of Gordian and
Aviola, 240.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Rosana.
Persons who are under the control of their fathers cannot bring suit against
them. But, if you have been emancipated, you will not be forbidden to do so,
provided you have claimed the benefit of the Edict; and this rule also applies
to the mother.
Given on the eighth of the Idesof November, during the Consulate of Diocletian,
Consul for the second time, and Maximian, 287.





TITLE III. CONCERNING INFORMAL AGREEMENTS.

1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Philinus.
The uncertainty of a condition can be terminated between two brothers by an
equitable agreement. Therefore, when you allege that, by the terms of a trust,
if your father should die without issue, he will leave his share of the estate
to Licinius Fronto; the agreement with reference to the sixth part of the
estate being given to the said Licinius Fronto, which was made at the time when
Philinus had no children, will not, for that reason, appear to be unjust,
because after the division had been made, as was intended, he died leaving you
his son.
Given on the seventh of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Severus, Consul for the second time, and Victorinus, 204.

2. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Claudius.
If, after the sale of the estate has been made by you, you can prove that the
creditors of said estate have brought suit against the purchasers, and the
latter have voluntarily undertaken the defence, you can then very properly
protect yourself on the ground of an implied agreement.

3. The Same to Restitutus.
The slave of a creditor can improve the condition of his master, but he cannot,
by means of a new agreement, render an obligation already legally contracted
disadvantageous.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Severus,
Consul for the third time, and Antoninus, 203.

4. The Same to Valeria.
After you have abandoned an action brought with reference to a tract of land,
no reason will permit you to revive it after it has once been disposed of:
Given on the fourth of the Idesof February, during the Consulate of Albinus and
Aemilianus, 207.

5. The Emperor Antoninus to Demagoras.
When you have paid your creditor a part of the debt, and it has been informally
agreed between you and him that he will not demand the remainder, on account of
your defence of his affairs, undertaken in good faith with your support, you
will be released from this obligation, partly by the Civil, and partly by the
praetorian law, for a perpetual exception based on an informal agreement, or on
the ground of had faith, will bar the collection of the remainder, as whatever
has been paid through ignorance can be recovered.
Given at Rome, on the eighth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of
Antoninus, Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.

6. The Same to Basilia.
It is an undoubted legal rule that informal agreements made contrary to the
laws and constitutions, or against good morals, have no force or effect
whatever.
Given on the Kalendsof August, during the same Consulate, 214.

7. The Same to Julius Maximus.
If you become the heir of your debtor, the action against him to which you are
entitled will be extinguished by merger, as soon as you enter upon the estate.
If, however, after you have obtained the estate in court, you should deliver it
to the party against whom you have obtained the judgment, under the condition
and agreement that if you do not accept the estate, he shall satisfy the other
creditors, as well as yourself, for what is due to you; a contract of this kind
must be observed, and if this is not done, an action based on the stipulation
will be granted, provided an agreement was made; or the action prescriptis
verbiswill lie, if no stipulation was entered into.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Antoninus,
Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.

8. The Same to Mucatraulius.
Where flocks are taken to be pastured on shares, that is to say, when it is
agreed by the parties that their increase shall be divided between the owner
and the shepherd, and it is proved that Apollinaris agreed to the contract, he
can be compelled by the judge to execute it.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof October, under the Consulate of Alexander
and Marcellus, 227.

9. The Emperor Alexander to Dionysius.
After your mother's adversary has lost his case, and has taken advantage of her
by making her furnish security that she will not raise any controversy with
reference to slaves, this agreement having been made in bad faith, is void. And
when he brings an action based on this agreement against your mother, the judge
must release her from liability.
Given on the day before the Idesof September, during the Consulate of
Alexander, Consul for the second time, and Marcellus, 227.

10. The Same to Nicas.
The condition which you prescribe when you give a dowry for your foster-
daughter must be observed; and the common statement that a right of action does
not arise from an informal agreement cannot be employed against you; for We
make use of this rule when the contract has no consideration; otherwise, when
money is given, and anything is agreed upon as to its repayment, a personal
action for its recovery will lie.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Albinus and
Maximus, 227.

11. The Same to Capito.
You allege that an agreement was made between your father and your stepmother,
at the time when she gave a tract of land as a dowry, to the effect that she
would pay the interest to the creditors to whom the land was hypothecated. You
cannot bring suit against her, even though it may be proved that the agreement
was made a part of the stipulation. If, however, a tract of land, which has
been appraised, is given by way of dowry (and this appears in the instrument),
an action on sale will lie, in order that the agreement may be carried out.
Given on the Nonesof December, during the Consulate of Alexander, Consul for
the third time, and Dio, Consul for the second time, 230.

12. The Same to Flacilla.
Law, as well as equity, requires that the most recent informal agreements shall
be observed; for which reason, if, by a prior agreement consent was given that
the claim should not bear interest, and especially if (as you propose), the
parties made the same statement before the Governor, you will not be forbidden
to bring the action to which you would have been entitled under the first
agreement.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Agricola and
Clement, 231. .

13. The Emperor Maximin to Marius.
In bona fidecontracts, an action on an informal agreement will only lie when
the agreement was made at the same time; for if it was made afterwards it will
not give rise to an action, but to an exception.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof January, during the Consulate of Maximin and
Africanus, 237.

14. The Emperor Gordian to the Soldier Coelius.
If a stipulation was added to the agreement under which you allege that your
adversary promised to pay a certain sum by way of penalty if he did not abide
by it, you can, by virtue of the stipulation, compel him to do what is included
in the agreement, or you can, in the usual way, exact the penalty provided by
the stipulation; as, without observing the ordinary legal formalities, you will
in vain demand that the property of your adversary be transferred to you.
Given on the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Gordian, Consul for the
second time, and Pompeianus, 242.

15. The Emperors Valentinian and Gallienus, and the Caesar Valerian to
Pactumeius.
The agreement included in the dotal instrument, namely, that if the father
should die, the daughter who was to be married should, with her brother, be
heirs to equal portions of the estate, gives rise to no obligation, and does
not deprive the father of the woman of the power to make a will.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Aemilianus
and Bassus, 267.

16. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Diaphantus.
When you allege that sons who have been appointed testamentary heirs are so
charged that the one who dies first must transfer to the other his share of the
estate, and as you assert that this precarious substitution of the brothers has
been abandoned by common consent, the reason for the execution of the trust no
longer exists.
Given on the third of the Idesof February, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Acquilinus, 286.

17. The Same to Deximachus.
The Governor of a province shall cause an agreement, which is shown to have
been made in good faith, to be executed according to law, even if it has not
been committed to writing; when the truth of the transaction can be established
by other evidence.
Given on the ninth of the Kalends of July, during the above-mentioned
Consulate, 287.

18. The Same to Julius and Aemilius.
If you prove that your creditors have permitted one of your co-debtors to pay a
portion of the debt in his own behalf, the Governor of the province shall, in
accordance with his dignity, see that neither party is sued for the
indebtedness of the other.
Given on the seventh of the Idesof January, during the Consulate of Diocletian,
Consul for the third time, and Maximian, 287.

19. The Same to the Soldier, Victorian.
Although a document drawn up between private persons, which provides that the
survivor shall obtain the property of the other, does not present the
appearance of a donation mortis causa,still, as the testament of a soldier,
disposing of his estate, and reduced to writing during his last moments, in
anticipation of death, has all the force of a last will; and you state that
your brother and yourself, being about to go into battle, made a reciprocal
agreement in view of the common fortune of death, in such a manner that the
property of him who died first should belong to the survivor; and the condition
having been complied with, it is understood that, by the will of your brother
(which rule is confirmed by the Imperial Constitutions), his entire property is
transferred to you.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Diocletian, Consul for the fifteenth time, and Maximian, Consul for the third
time.

20. The Same to Martial.
The ownership of property is transferred by delivery and usucaption, and not by
informal agreements without consideration.
Given on the Kalendsof January, during the fifth and fourth Consulates of the
Same Consuls, respectively, 293.

21. The Same Emperors, and the Caesars, to Eusebius.When you state that it was
agreed between you, without having been committed to writing, that the
inheritances of your brothers should
be divided into equal shares, and that it can be proved by the form of the
transaction that this agreement was actually made, you can protect yourself by
an exception, if you have possession of the property.
When, however, your adversary has possession, you must understand that no right
of action will arise from such an agreement, if you did not provide for it by a
stipulation, and your adversary will not be permitted to avail himself of the
transaction, unless he is ready to carry out what was agreed upon.
Given on the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Faustus, Consul for the
second time, and Gallus, 298.

22. The Same Emperors, and the Caesars, to Archelaus.
The agreement of a curator to accept a smaller amount than is due does not have
the effect of injuring a minor of adult age, for guardians and curators, in
collecting what is due to their wards or minors, cannot release the debtor from
his obligation, even if they remit the debt.
Given on the eighteenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the
same Emperors; the first, Consul for the seventh time, and the second, Consul
for the sixth time, 299.

23. The Same, and the Caesars, to Honoratus.
A son, by entering into an agreement, or accepting payment of a debt, does not
diminish the obligation due to his father.
Given on the seventeenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the
same Emperors; the first, Consul for the seventh time, and the second, Consul
for the sixth time, 299.

24. The Same, and the Caesars, to Domina.
If you have a right of action growing out of a legacy or a trust against the
heirs of your former husband, and it is proved that you have relinquished it in
favor of others of the heirs, understand that where you bring suit against the
debtors, an exception based on the agreement cannot prejudice you in any way.
Given on the seventh of the Kalendsof January, during the third Consulate of
the Caesars, 300.

25. The Same, and the Caesars, to Euthemerus.
The rights of creditors cannot be extinguished or altered by agreements made by
their debtors with one another.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof May, during the third Consulate of the
Caesars, 300.

26. The Same, and the Caesars, to Cornelia.
Under the Law of the Twelve Tables, an agreement entered into by the heirs of a
debtor by which the indebtedness of the estate was divided in proportion to the
shares cannot bind one of the debtors to the creditor for the entire amount,
and this also takes place where the heirs succeed under the praetorian law;
hence, you can, so far as
your interest is involved, bring an action against one of the co-heirs for the
production of their common acknowledgment of the indebtedness in writing, or to
establish the fact that no agreement for such an appointment was made.
Given on the third of the Idesof October, during the Consulate of the Caesars.

27. The Same, and the Caesars, to Aurelius Chresimus.
Anyone who brings suit under a stipulation which has been added in order to
insure the execution of a contract, whether an informal agreement was made
previously, or immediately afterwards, demands that a decision be rendered in
accordance with the provisions of the latter.
Given at Heraclea, on the sixth of the Idesof November, during the Consulate of
the Caesars.

28. The Same, and the Caesars, to Leontius.
Where money has been paid for some years under an agreement without
consideration, he who made payment cannot afterwards compel the other party to
refund what was received on the ground of its not having been due, unless a
stipulation to that effect has been added.
Given on the third of the Nonesof December, during the Consulate of the same
Emperors; the first, Consul for the eighth time, and the second, Consul for the
second time.

29. The Emperor Justinian to John, Praetorian Prefect.
Where anyone, when drawing up an instrument, states that he will not avail
himself of any exception to which he is entitled on account of his military
rank, his dignity, or his prerogative as a member of the priesthood, although
it formerly might have been doubted whether it was necessary to comply with
this agreement, if the person who made it did not repudiate it, or whether he
had the power to violate it and exercise his right, We order that no one shall
be permitted to repudiate his written agreement and deceive the contracting
parties, for it is provided by the Edict of the Praetor himself that informal
agreements which are not contrary to law, or which have been entered into with
fraudulent intent, must, under all circumstances, be observed; wherefore would
not such agreements be valid in this instance, as there is another rule of
ancient law which provides that all persons have the right to repudiate
anything which has been done for their benefit. Hence, all Our judges must
observe this rule in litigation, and it applies to ordinary judges of inferior
jurisdiction,[[1]]

[[1]] These were special, permanent deputy judges (judices delegati),to whom were
assigned the decision of unimportant matters, or the ascertainment of the facts
of a case, by magistrates of superior jurisdiction. The name was derived from
the fact that they, as it were, sat at the feet of the court (quasi ad pedes
praetoris).
The judices pedaneiof later times constituted an important branch of the
Byzantine judiciary. They were twelve in number; were appointed from the ranks
of the aristocracy and from those members of the profession most distinguished
to mediators and to arbitrators, and they are notified that if they fail to
comply with it, they shall be understood to have made the case their own.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof September, after the Consulate of
Lampadius and Orestes, 331.


30. The Same to John, Praetorian Prefect.
We have been asked the following question by the Bar of Caesarea: "Two or more
persons expected to receive an estate, either on account of their relationship,
or because of informal agreements entered into between them with reference to
the said estate, in which agreements it was expressly stated that if the owner
of it should die, and the estate should go to them, certain arrangements should
be made concerning the same; or if any of said persons should receive any
particular benefit from the estate, certain provisions were to be carried out;
and a doubt arose whether agreements of this kind should be observed."
The difficulty arises from the fact that the agreement had been entered into
while the owner of the estate was still alive, because agreements of this kind
are not based upon the fact that the parties are, under all circumstances,
certain to receive the estate, but are dependent upon two conditions; namely,
that the owner of the same should die, and that those who made such an
agreement should be called to the succession.
All contracts of this kind, however, seem to Us to be abominable, and capable
of producing the saddest and most dangerous effects; for why should any persons
make an agreement concerning the property of a person who is still living, and
not be aware of what they have done ? Therefore, in accordance with the rules
of the ancients, We order that agreements of this kind, which are entered into
against good morals, shall be absolutely void, and that nothing in them shall
be observed, unless the person with reference to whose estate the agreement was
made gives his consent, and from that time to the end of his life remains of
the same kind. For, under these circumstances, all untimely expectations having
been removed, it will be lawful for the agreements to be carried out, as the
owner of the property is aware of, and consents to them.
This rule was not unknown to former laws and constitutions, but it has been
presented by Us in a clearer manner. For We order that neither donations of
such property, nor hypothecations of the same, shall be permitted under any
circumstances whatsoever, that no one shall make a contract for this purpose;
and also that after Our reign,


for their attainments and reputation, and took cognizance of questions of both
law and fact. Suits involving sums to the amount of three hundred solidi(about
$8,100, at the present value of money) were heard and decided by them, without
reducing the proceedings to writing.
Many eminent provincial lawyers, some of whom had already served in the
capacity of magistrates, were raised to this dignity. An appeal lay from this
tribunal either to that of the Emperor alone, or to officials appointed by him
for this purpose. --- ED.

it shall not be permissible for anything to be done or contracted for with
reference to the estate of another, without his consent.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof November, after the Consulate of
Lampadius and Orestes, 531.





TITLE IV. CONCERNING COMPROMISES.

1. The Emperor Antoninus to Celerius.
No agreement or compromise made with certain curators or guardians shall be of
any advantage to the others, so far as any property which they have, or should
have administered, either separately or conjointly, is concerned; and,
therefore, if you have three curators and compromise with two of them, you will
not be prevented from suing the third.
Given on the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Gentian and Bassus, 212.
2. The Same to Luctatius.
As you allege that you have made a settlement with your sister, with reference
to an estate, and that you have given security to her for a certain sum of
money that you owe her, although there is no dispute about the estate, still,
as you made the compromise through fear of a legal action, the debt is
understood to have been properly secured, and therefore if you pay the
Treasury, you cannot recover it; and if you do not do so, you can legally be
sued.
Given on the third of the Idesof August, during the Consulate of Antoninus,
Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
3. The Emperor Alexander to Tullia.
Bring an action against Geminian, on the ground that his father, who was
appointed your curator, transacted your business; and, if he should deny in
court that he is liable to this action, as a compromise and a stipulation was
affected under the Aquilian Law, the judge, in consideration of the decision
demanded in good faith, shall ascertain upon what sum of money the compromise
was based, and if it appears that this was done for a smaller amount than was
proved to be due as a balance under the administration of the curatorship, he
shall order him to pay it; for the reason that, according to the Aquilian
stipulation, none of the sum of money which was due can legally be deducted.
Given on the day before the Idesof August, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Aelianus, 324.
4. The Same to Numidius.
Where an action under the Aquilian stipulation to compel the rendition of an
account of the administration of a curatorship has been brought by a party who
has become of lawful age, and the claim has
been extinguished by a release, the plaintiff cannot have recourse to any other
action, unless there is no doubt that fraud has been committed, unless a
compromise having special reference to the fraud was made.
Given on the second of the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of Alexander,
Consul for the second time, and Marcellus, 227.
5. The Same to Evocatus.
As you assert that you have compromised with the heir of your former guardian,
if you did so after arriving at your majority, you will in vain demand that the
contract be rescinded; for although (as you say), no instrument was drawn up,
still, as it is established by your statement that the contract was actually
made, the written instrument which usually contains the evidence of the
transaction is not necessary.
Given on the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Albinus and Aemilianus.
6. The Same to Pomponius.
As you allege that your mother, after having filed a complaint that the will
was inofficious, has compromised with some of the heirs, and agreed to accept a
portion of the estate and abandon the suit, the law will not permit you, as the
heir of your mother, to renew a complaint which she has abandoned; if, however,
the agreement was not carried out, you can properly sue a portion of the heirs
to the extent of the interest of each. For where a stipulation is attached to
an agreement, an action based on it will lie; or if the verbal obligation was
omitted, an equitable action to show that the transaction was concluded
praescriptis verbisshould be granted.
Given on the eighth of the Idesof January, during the Consulate of Agricola and
Clement, 231.
7. The Same to the Soldier Licinius.
An agreement for a compromise made by a person whom you directed to bring the
action, but not to enforce judgment, will not, in any way, prejudice your
claim.
Given on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of
Gordian and Aviola, 240.
8. The Emperor Gordian to the Soldier Junius.
When a question is raised with reference to support which has not been
provided, a compromise can be made; but one which involves future maintenance
is not considered to be of any legal force unless it has been authorized by
either the Praetor or the Governor.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof January, under the Consulate of Pius and
Pontianus, 239.
9. The Same to Agrippinus.
If suit for the possession of property is brought against you by your wife's
brother, and you defend it after having (as you allege),
made an agreement and a stipulation with him that if your adversary should,
within a specified time, pay you ten aurei,you will give him possession; or, if
he should not pay you the said sum, he cannot proceed further against you; and
he who makes such a promise does not comply with it, the result will be that
you, to whom the property belongs, ought not to suffer any violence from him;
and the illustrious Governor of the province, having been applied to on this
account, shall forbid force to be employed to your injury, and, above all, if
an action in remshould lie in favor of the adverse party, he can, under an
agreement of this kind, be barred by an equitable exception.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof April, during the Consulship of Gordian,
Consul for the second time, and Pompeianus, 242.
10. The Emperor Philip to Apollophania.
You will unjustly bring a complaint against the sons of your brother on account
of the estate of their father, and with reference to their condition, as this
is contrary to the ties of blood as well as to the faith of contracts, for
there would be no end to litigation, if bona fidecompromises could easily be
violated.
Given on the day before the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Peregrinus
and Aemilianus, 245.
11. The Emperors Valerian Gallienus, and the Noble Caesar Valerian, to the
Soldier Caianus.
The compromise made between your brother and yourself with reference to a trust
created by your father providing that if either of you should die without
issue, is valid; as it is mantained by the harmony existing between the
brothers, rendering it improbable that one of them should desire the death of
the other; and it cannot be rescinded on the ground that advantage has been
taken of you, as, under this agreement, you have given your promise not to
avail yourself of the age when it is customary for a person to be released from
his obligations; and, if you institute proceedings, you should not, for the
same reason, obtain the benefit of complete restitution.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Valerian and Gallienus, both Consuls for the second time, 256.
12. The Same to Primus.
The Governor of the province shall ascertain whether the compromise entered
into between you and the rulers of your city was made with reference to an
action whose issue was doubtful, or whether you have improperly obtained a
release for what should unquestionably be paid; and, in the former instance, he
shall order the compromise to stand, and in the latter, he must not allow it to
prejudice the rights of the city.
Given on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of
Aemilianus and Bassus, 260.
13. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Proba.
It is stated in the Perpetual Edict that a compromise effected through fear is
not valid; but it is not every kind of apprehension which is sufficient to
rescind those which have been made by consent, but the fear must be proved to
be such as threatens danger to life, or suffering to the body. The nature of
the principal cause is not, however, sufficient to prove violence or fraud;
hence if nothing of this kind can be established, it will, by no means, be
necessary for controversies which have been terminated to be renewed.
But, as you assert that the person with whom you have compromised is the son of
your female slave, and is your slave, if the facts stated in the petition are
true, another reason exists for declaring the agreement void; for there is no
doubt whatever that, under the law, masters who make agreements with their
slaves cannot be held liable under any such contracts.
Given at Byzantium, on the fourth of the Nonesof April, during the Consulate of
the same Emperors; the first, Consul for the fourth time, and the second,
Consul for the third time, 258.
14. The Same to Sopatra.
Where the adverse party brings suit to annul the contract, equity suggests that
if the money should be refunded (and you consent to it), the action can be
brought again.
Given on the fourth of the Nonesof July, during the Consulate of the same
Emperors; the first, Consul for the fourth time, and the second, Consul for the
third time, 290.
. 15. The Same to Pontius.
In order that you may receive a suitable reply, you should insert a copy of the
contract in your application, so that We may understand whether an ordinary
agreement has been made, or whether a stipulation under the Aquilian Law and a
release have been added; and if this has been done, it is clear that your
adversary is not entitled to bring suit to recover the estate, or claim any
special property.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof August, during the abovementioned
Consulate, 290.
16. The Same to Caecilius.
It is prohibited by an Imperial Rescript to revive any case or litigation which
has been terminated by lawful compromise.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof March, during the administration of the above-
mentioned Consuls; the first, Consul for the fifth time, and the second, Consul
for the fourth time, 293.
17. The Same Emperors and Caesars to Marcellus.
As you allege with reference to the person against whom you petition, and who
had a lawsuit with you, that she, after having received the property which you
agreed to give her for the purpose of putting an end to the matter in dispute,
now desires to repudiate the agree-
ment and you request that she either abide by it, or restore the property which
was given to her; examine whether you made provision that if she violated the
agreement, the property should be returned, but the compromise and the
stipulation should stand, if at that time she was over twenty-five years of
age; because, under these circumstances, you can interpose an exception based
on the agreement, and bring suit to recover the property which you have given;
but if nothing of this kind was agreed upon, you will be entitled to an
exception, but you will not have the right to recover the property which you
have given.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof June, during the above-mentioned Consulate,
293.
18. The Same, and the Caesars, to Valens.
It is not forbidden to compromise or make an agreement with reference to a
capital crime, with the exception of adultery; and in other public crimes which
do not involve the penalty of death no compromise can be made, except where an
accusation of forgery is made.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof September, under the abovementioned
Consulate, 293.
19. The Same, and the Caesars, to Irenaeus.
We do not permit a bona fidecompromise to be rescinded under the pretext of
subsequently discovered documentary evidence. When, however, it can be proved
that the decision of the case has been obtained by the concealment of
instruments necessary to establish the truth, either by the interested party
himself, or by another, if the action still remains, an exception based on
contract can be met by a reply alleging bad faith; but where it has already
been disposed of, you can only bring suit on the ground of fraud within the
time prescribed by law.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof October, under the abovementioned
Consulate, 393.
20. The Same, and the Caesars, to Antistia.
It is with good reason held that no less authority attaches to compromises than
to matters which have been judicially decided; and, indeed, nothing is so
agreeable to the good faith of human nature as for men to abide by the
agreements which they have entered into; and in order to rescind an agreement
it is not sufficient for you to state that it was made during the second hour
of the night, as no time authorizes the repudiation of consent by a person of
sound mind who has reached the age of twenty-five years.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof October, under the abovementioned
Consulate, 492.
21. The Same, and the Caesars, to Geminian.
It is ordered that those things which, under the terms of a compromise, it has
been agreed shall be given or retained, for example
where it has been determined to take as a purchaser a person who has been
deemed acceptable, any fictitious transaction being considered as not having
taken place, the demand for the payment of the imaginary price shall be made in
vain.
Given on the fifth of the Nonesof October, under the above-mentioned Consulate,
293.
22. The Same, and the Caesars, to Alexander.
If you make a compromise during your majority, an action based upon fraud will
not be sufficient to rescind it.
Given on the Kalendsof December during the above-mentioned Consulate, 293.
23. The Same, and the Caesars, to Tatian.
The institution of proceedings by the creditors of Archimedorus, to whom you
allege others have succeeded, will not affect you, if you were not liable for
him; but it is proper that the matter should be decided after a thorough
investigation, since, as you say that the dispute has already been settled by a
compromise, and that the sum of money agreed upon has been paid by you, you
will very improperly ask that you should be granted an action under the pretext
of having paid money which was not due; as, even if only a stipulation has been
entered into, you cannot defend yourself on the ground that you have promised
what was not due.
Given on the eighth of the Idesof March, under the Consulate of the Caesars,
294.
24. The Same, and the Caesars, to Victorvnus.
If, after having received whatever was mentioned in the instrument drawn up
with reference to the compromise, and it having been agreed that nothing more
should be demanded, you perceive that your adversary is defending herself by
means of an exception, you will by no means be prevented from collecting the
remainder of the debt, if she should be forced, without any judicial decision,
to pay a certain amount which she confessed that she owes.
Given at Sirmium, on the fifth of the Nonesof April, under the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.
25. The Same Emperors and Caesars to Marcella and Quirilla.
If, after having attained the age of twenty-five years, you should make a
compromise with either your paternal or maternal uncle, and release to him
unconditionally what was due to you, as a donation, for the reason that you did
not allege that you made this agreement for the sake of obtaining the estate,
that is to say, with the expectation of a future inheritance, and others
succeed to him, the compromise having been terminated, you cannot dispute it.
Given on the second of the Idesof April, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
294.
26. The Same, and the Caesars, to Dionysiada.It is a well-known rule of law that
children cannot become slaves through any compromise made by their mother.
Given on the Idesof April, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
294.
27. The Same, and the Caesars, to Cato.
It is clear that anyone, who is of sound mind, even though he may be ill in
body, can legally make a compromise; and you should not, with unjust intention,
demand that the contract be rescinded under the pretext of corporeal in
disposition.
Given on the seventh of the Idesof May, under the Consulate of the Caesars, 294.
28. The Same, and the Caesars, to Saparita.
Whether the compromise in question was entered into, and recorded in the
registers of the Governor of the province, or whether this was not done, or
whether it was committed to writing or not, it is proper for it to be observed;
but, as you acknowledge that you agreed to receive something certain, even if
this was not committed to writing, and no stipulation with reference to it was
added, although a right of action does not arise from such an agreement, still,
if while the suit for the recovery of the property is pending an exception on
contract is opposed to you, you can, by making use of a reply based on fraud,
or in factum,force your adversary to comply with the agreement.
Given on the third of the Nonesof July, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
294.
29. The Same, and the Caesars, to Martia.
The laws forbid that after a general compromise has been effected, it should be
rescinded on the ground of newly discovered documentary evidence; but a mistake
with reference to the ownership of the property at the time that the compromise
was made can injure no one except the contracting parties.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.
30. The Same, and the Caesars, to Antoninus.
As you allege that after the compromise was effected more fraud had been
committed by you than by those against whom you filed your petition, it would
be injurious, as well as criminal, for you to revive the dispute.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof October, during the Consulate of
the Caesars, 294.
31. The Same, and the Caesars, to Proculus.
Where a compromise has been made with reference to certain property, and it was
agreed that nothing more should be demanded,
even though this may not have been inserted in the instrument, the right of
action will nevertheless remain unimpaired, so far as other matters are
concerned.
Given at Byzantium, on the fourth of the Idesof October, during the Consulate
of the Caesars.
32. The Same, and the Caesars, to Cyrillus.
Where, after proper cause has been shown, a decision is rendered (as prescribed
by law), it will not be suspended by taking an appeal, or by the formality of
complete restitution; and it is not at all uncertain that you have compromised
in vain with reference to the judgment; and hence, if a stipulation and release
have not been added under the Aquilian Law, you have extinguished the right of
action to which you were entitled, and the Governor of the province, in
accordance with legal procedure, shall see that the judgment previously
rendered is executed.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.
33. The Same, and the Caesars, to Euchrusius.
If it was provided by the terms of a compromise that you should be given a
certain tract of land defined by metes and bounds, instead of another tract
which you claimed, and at that time you were over twenty-five years of age;
although it may be proved that the said tract of land had subsequently been
encumbered, or partly belonged to someone else, the law forbids the case to be
revived, after it has once been decided. You can, indeed, bring suit under the
stipulation, if one was attached to the agreement, or if not, you can bring the
civil Actio de praescriptus verbisbefore the Governor of the province. If,
however, the Treasury, or anyone else, should demand of you the same property,
which is in your possession, and with reference to the ownership of which the
decision was rendered in the aforesaid case, you cannot claim anything.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof November, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
294.
34. The Same, and the Caesars, to Cyrillus and Ptolemaidus.
As you state that you have knowingly, by reason of either a donation or a
compromise, released your brother from what was due to you on account of the
administration of a guardianship, and as fraud cannot be committed against
anyone who gives his consent, you will in vain complain of it; for no one is
compelled to fulfill an obligation by the promise of his own estate.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof November, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
294.
35. The Same, and the Caesars, to Hammon.
It having been shown that a compromise made by the transfer of the ownership of
property or by the dismissal of an action has actually
taken place through the intervention of friends, the demand of the plaintiff
that it should be rescinded under the pretext of duress discloses his bad
faith.
Given at Nicomedia, on the ninth of the Kalendsof December, during the
Consulate of the Caesars, 294.
36. The Same, and the Caesars, to Achilla.
If you negotiated a compromise when you were more than twenty-five years of
age, and those who executed the agreement are not proved to have done so, and
do not consent to it, equity demands that nothing more be required of them.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof December, under the Consulate
of the Caesars, 294.
37. The Same, and the Caesars, to Basylissa.
Where promises made on account of a compromise have not been fulfilled, it is
established that the penalty included in the stipulation can be exacted, in
case the contract is violated.
Given at Nicomedia, on the twelfth of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of the Caesars, 294.
38. The Same, and the Caesars, to Theodotian.
A compromise is of no effect unless something is given, retained,
or promised.
Given at Nicomedia, on the eighth of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of the Caesars, 294.
39. The Same, and the Caesars, to Martian.
Although the person who made the compromise may immediately repent of having
done so, still the agreement cannot be rescinded, and the lawsuit renewed; and
he who has convinced you that it is lawful to repudiate a compromise within a
certain time states what is false.
Given on the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of the Caesars, 294.
40. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Eutroplus, Praetorian
Prefect.
When the agreement or compromise has been committed to writing, and it has
acquired legal effect through the stipulation and release made under the
Aquilian Law, either consent must be given to other matters which have been
properly added, or the penalty, together with what is proved to have been
conceded before the case was heard, shall be collected (if the adversary wishes
this to be done).
Given at Constantinople, on the third of the Nonesof June, during the
Consulship of Eucherius and Syagrius, 381.
41. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Rufinus, Praetorian Prefect.
If anyone over twenty-five years of age should think that, either by applying
to the judge, or by petitioning the Emperor, or by not
fulfilling his promises which he confirmed by invoking the name of Almighty
God, he can violate contracts or compromises which have not been made with the
employment of force, but have been negotiated with his free will and consent,
he shall not only be branded with infamy, but shall also be deprived of his
right of action; and after having paid the penalty inserted in the agreement,
he shall lose the ownership of the property, and the advantages which he would
have obtained through the said agreement or compromise. Therefore, all these
things shall be to the advantage of those who preserve their contracts
inviolate, and We order that they shall be considered worthy of the praise or
benefit of this law who, inserting Our name in their contracts, swear that the
invocation of the Emperor is the confirmation of the agreements which they have
made.
Given at Constantinople, on the fifth of the Idesof October, during the
Consulate of Olybrius and Probinus, 395.
42. The Emperors Leo and Anthemius to Achrochirius, Praetorian Prefect.
When compromises or agreements based upon forged documents have been made, even
though an oath may have been taken with reference to them, We, nevertheless,
order that, after their falsity has been disclosed, they shall be annulled, in
such a way, however, that if any compromise involving several cases or matters
has been effected, only that case or part shall be annulled which is proved to
have been inserted in a forged document, but all the others shall remain
unimpaired, unless where a controversy having arisen with reference to
something which is said to be false, it has been settled by compromise.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Martian
and Zeno, 469.
43. The Emperor Anastasius to Thomas, Praetorian Prefect of Illyria.
We order that all compromises made with a view to disposing of litigation
already begun and pending, or which may afterwards arise, concerning the
servile condition, or serfs attached to the glebe, shall be carried out; or if
they should happen to have already been executed, and this has not been done
contrary to law, that they shall remain in full force, and shall not be
regarded as lacking stability on account of their tenor, for the reason that
they have been entered into on account of the servile condition, or serfdom.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Patricius and Hypatius, 541.


TITLE V. CONCERNING ERRORS IN CALCULATION.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Aurelianus Quartus.
It has frequently been decided that an error in calculation, whether it is
found in one contract or in several, shall not prejudice the truth;
and therefore it is an established rule of law that, even where accounts have
often been computed, they can again be examined, if the case has not been
finally decided, or a compromise has not been effected. Where, however, through
a mistake in calculation, you promised a certain sum of money as being due,
when it was not, you have a right to be released from the obligation.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof March, under the above-mentioned Consulate.
TITLE VI. CONCERNING LITIGATION.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Artemidorus.
For the reason that, when you were forbidden by the Prefect of Egypt from
bringing an action at any time, you did not appeal, obey his decision.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Sabinus,
Consul for the second time, and Anulinus, 217.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Polydorus.
The freedmen of others, as well as My own, are hereby prohibited from
practicing the profession of the law, even where they are learned in letters.
Given on the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of Julian, Consul for the
second time, and Crispinus, 225.
3. The Emperor Gordian to Flavian.
If, having voluntarily agreed upon the amount to be paid to your advocate as a
fee, you furnished security, just as if you had borrowed money from him and had
promised to repay it, and you have not confirmed your consent and your
obligation, and no legal business has been transacted during the term of two
years, you can protect yourself from payment by interposing an exception, and
can bring suit to recover the security furnished in the usual way on this
account.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof June, during the Consulate of Sabinus, Consul
for the second time, and Venustus, 241.
4. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Theodotus.
Anyone will, in vain, under the pretext of the absence of his advocate, attempt
to revive an action which has already been terminated.
Given at Nicomedia, on the fourth of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of the Caesars, 294.
5. The Emperor Constantine to Helladius.
If advocates, without any regard for their reputation, should be found to have
collected excessive and unlawful sums under the pretext of fees, for the
transaction of business which they have undertaken, and, by demanding such
remuneration for themselves, inflict
serious injury and loss upon litigants, it is hereby decreed that all those who
are guilty of such extortion shall be immediately expelled from the profession.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Paulinus and
Julian, 326.
6. The Emperors Valentinian and Valens to Olybrius, Urban Prefect.
Anyone who desires to be a pleader cannot act as advocate and judge in the same
case, since a distinction must exist between those who decide cases and those
who argue them.
(1) Advocates shall, above all things, defend the cases of those who retain
them in such a way as to do nothing more than the success of the actions
demands, and they shall not employ abuse and slander. They must do whatever the
case requires, but refrain from vituperation; for if anyone should be so bold
as to think his case should be conducted not by argument but by personal
invective, he shall suffer the loss of reputation. Nor shall anyone be
permitted, after the case is terminated, to heap contumely upon his adversary
either openly or clandestinely.
(2) Moreover, an advocate must enter into no contract with the litigant who has
confided in him, and he must make no informal agreement with him.
(3) None of those whom it is lawful or proper to employ as advocates shall
treat with contempt what his client voluntarily offers him in payment for his
services.
(4) No one shall himself delay the trial of a case which has been entrusted to
him.
(5) Those who, in the City of Rome, have adopted the legal profession, are
permitted to practice it as much as they desire, provided they do not take
occasion to obtain dishonorable profits, and unreasonable fees, but may only
seek to increase their professional reputation. Where, however, they are
influenced by the love of gain and money, they shall be considered abject and
degenerate, and be classed as the meanest of mankind.
(6) Therefore, let each of those whom We permit to practice this profession,
and who desires to be an advocate, know that while he does so, he can only
exercise this calling and no other. And let none of them think that he is
deprived of any honor, when he has himself selected the position of advocate,
and relinquished that of judge.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Valentinian and Valens, 368.
7. The Same and Gratian to Olybrius, Urban Prefect.
Care must be taken to prevent those who attain to a high rank at the bar,
either through their merits or their erudition, from being engaged on one side,
when the other is necessarily committed to such as are without skill or
experience; and therefore if two or more of superior reputation are not to be
found in the same court, it shall be
the duty of the judge to make such an assignment of the advocates that an equal
division may take place and each party have proper assistance. If, however, an
advocate notified by the judge should refuse to appear for one of the parties,
and offers an excuse which cannot be accepted, he shall be dismissed from the
bar, and he is also notified that he can never again have an opportunity to
practice his profession.
When any litigant has been shown to have retained several advocates separately,
and by such a fraud prevented his adversary from making an adequate defence, he
discloses beyond doubt that the suit which he has brought is unjust, and that
he has attempted to deceive
the court.
Given on the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Valentinian and Valens,
both Consuls for the third time, 370.
8. The Emperors Leo and Anthemius to Nicostratus, Praetorian Prefect.
No one shall be admitted to practice in your court, or in any provincial one,
nor shall appear with other members of the bar before any judge, unless he has
been initiated into the holy mysteries of the Catholic Religion. Moreover, if
anything should be done or attempted in any way, or by any artifice whatsoever,
in violation of this law, your office shall be compelled to pay a fine of a
hundred pounds of
gold.
Again, anyone who dares to surreptitiously usurp the office of advocate,
contrary to the Decree which We have promulgated, and practices the legal
profession without authority, shall be removed from the position of advocate,
shall have his property confiscated, and shall be sentenced to perpetual exile;
and Governors of provinces are also hereby notified that he under whose
administration anything of this kind is attempted shall be deprived of half of
his property, and sentenced to exile for the term of five years.
Given at Constantinople, on the day before the Kalendsof April, during the
Consulate of Anthemius, Consul for the second time, 468.


TITLE VII.
CONCERNING THE ADVOCATES OF DIFFERENT TRIBUNALS.

1. The Emperor Antoninus to Dolo.
If you think that the advocate in the case has been guilty of prevarication,
and you prove the charge, sentence shall be passed upon him in accordance with
the gravity of the offence which he has committed, and the suit shall again be
commenced. But if you do not establish the prevarication, you will be branded
as guilty of false accusation, and the case shall stand as decided, unless an
appeal has been taken.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Antoninus,
Consul for the fourth time, and Albinus, 214.
2. The Emperors Valens, Gratian, and Valentinian to Antony, Praetorian Prefect.
We are unwilling to permit those who are compelled to perform the duties of
office in the cities of their residence, and are assembled as decurions, to go
from one place to another, or act as advocates, and they must discharge the
functions of curule employments in their own towns, in such a way, however,
that they shall not be allowed to appear in cases against the municipality in
which they have obtained this honor.
Given at Ravenna, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof September, during the
Consulate of Valens, Consul for the sixth time, and Valentinian, Consul for the
second time, 378.
3. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Africanus, Praetorian Prefect.
No member of the bar who holds a civil office, unless he is a decurion, shall
undertake to discharge his official duties in his province, as those who
intrigue to obtain them are excluded; and, on the other hand, they are obliged
to accept such offices even against their will.
Given at Constantinople, on the third of the Nonesof August, during the
Consulate of Arcadius, Consul for the fourth time, and Honorius, Consul for the
third time, 394.
4. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Eustachius, Praetorian Prefect.
The advocates belonging to your bar and jurisdiction are entitled to what they
may have gained in the practice of their profession, or on this occasion; and
they can claim it as their own property after the death of their father, just
as they could do their peculium castrense,if they were in the military service.
Given at Constantinople, on the tenth of the Kalendsof April, during the
Consulate of Honorius, Consul for the thirteenth time, and Theodosius, Consul
for the tenth time, 422.
5. The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian to Cyrus, Urban Prefect.
The advocates of the Illustrious Urban Prefecture are hereby notified that the
same privileges which We, actuated by generosity and Imperial munificence, have
granted to members of the bar belonging to the Illustrious Prefecture of the
East, through respect for their attainments, are bestowed upon them by the
present law.
Given at Constantinople, on the seventh of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of Theodosius, Consul for the twelfth time, and Valentinian, Consul
for the second time, 426.
6. The Same to Florentius, Praetorian Prefect.We order that no charge be
imposed, under any circumstances, by your Illustrious Prefecture, or by any
judge, upon advocates who
are practicing in your jurisdiction; and let no one think that any charges can
be imposed upon the advocates of the provinces, or upon the distinguished
judges. Hence no inspection of public works can be required of advocates; nor
can they be compelled to superintend any division of property, or the
construction of any work; or take part in any argument, or any settlement of
accounts; and finally, no civil duties should be exacted from them, with the
exception of that of arbitration, and this only in the place where they
practice their profession; and if anyone should attempt to violate the
provisions of this law, he shall be liable to the penalty of fifty pounds of
gold.
Given at Constantinople, on the seventh of the Kalendsof March, during the
Consulate of Theodosius, Consul for the seventeenth time, and Festus, 439.
7. The Same to Thalassius, Praetorian Prefect of Illyria.
We decree that the Bar of the Illustrious Prefecture of Illyria shall enjoy the
same privileges and immunities as are enjoyed by that of the Eminent Praetorian
Prefecture of the East.
Given at Constantinople, on the seventh of the Idesof September, during the
Consulate of Theodosius, Consul for the seventeenth time, and Festus, 439.
8. The Same to Cyrus, Praetorian Prefect and Consul Elect.
The number of praetorian advocates is limited to a hundred and fifty, and cannot
be either diminished or increased. We order that those who are selected from
them to represent the Treasury shall, together with their children already born
and who may be born at any time hereafter, be exempt from the obligations
growing out of attendance upon public functionaries, or those of any other
inferior condition; and when they have relinquished their office, after having
exercised it for an entire year, they can leave the Order of Advocates, and
resign the office of consistorial count; and, by the authority of this law We
decree that everything which has been obtained in any case by the advocates of
your bar, under any title whatsoever, they can claim as their own, in the same
manner as castrense peculium,and that such property cannot be acquired by their
fathers or their paternal grandfathers.
These provisions apply to all the advocates of the Urban Prefecture.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of
Valentinian and Anatolius, 440.
9. The Same to Apollonius, Praetorian Prefect.
If anyone of the members of your bar or of that of the Illyrian, or of the
urban Prefecture, or of those who practice their profession in the tribunals of
the province, should through your selection undertake the task of governing a
province, after having discharged the duty of his office honorably and without
reproach, he shall have the power to resume the calling from which he was
taken, and by which
he obtained the means of subsistence, and he cannot be prevented, by the malice
of anyone, from again trying cases.
Given at Constantinople, on the twelfth of the Kalendsof September, during the
Consulate of Eudoxius and Dioscorus, 442.
10. The Emperors Valentinian and Martian to Palladius, Praetorian Prefect.
We order that every year the two advocates of the highest reputation in your
tribunal shall be selected to represent the Treasury, and shall enjoy the same
honors and privileges enjoyed by him who formerly was appointed Advocate of the
Treasury.
Given at Constantinople, on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof July, during the
Consulate of Herculanus and Asporatius, 452.
11. The Emperor Leo to Vivianus, Praetorian Prefect.
We order that no one shall, under the pretext of assistants, be permitted to
increase the prescribed number of a hundred and fifty advocates, who form the
Council of your Illustrious Prefecture.
(1) Moreover, no one can be admitted to the Order of Advocates in your
jurisdiction, unless, after having undergone the examination of the eminent
Governor of the province where he was born, in the presence of the subordinate
officials, it becomes clear that he is in no way liable to the life and
fortunes of the latter. We wish this to be done in the presence of the Governor
of the province, and if he should be absent, the proofs must be established
before the municipal defender. We order that persons distinguished for legal
erudition, and doctors of the law, shall certify under oath that he who desires
to be admitted is learned in the science of jurisprudence.
We also desire that the sons of advocates of your bar who are now practicing,
or shall do so at some future time, shall be preferred to all other
supernumeraries.1
(2) In addition to this We decree that those who exceed the number of one
hundred and fifty advocates, belonging to your bar, shall be permitted to
appear before the Illustrious Proconsul, the Augustal Prefect, the Count of the
East, the eminent vicegerents, and the Governors of provinces, for the purpose
of conducting cases.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof February, under the Consulate of
Magnus and Apollonius, 460.
12. The Same to Eusebius, Praetorian Prefect of Illyria.
We order that the Advocate of the Treasury who is attached to your tribunal
shall surrender his office at the end of two years here-
1 The division of the Roman bar into two classes, one the advocates proper,
constituting a corporate body, or collegium,whose number was established by law
in every city; and the supernumeraries, from whom, in the order of their rank,
as inscribed upon the public registers, all vacancies in the former class were
filled, dated from the reign of Constantine. The supernumeraries did not belong
to any legal organization; their residence was not, like that of their
superiors, restricted to any particular locality; and they had the right to
practice anywhere in courts of inferior jurisdiction, but enjoyed no special
privileges. --- ED.
after, and not every year as formerly; and that he shall continue to enjoy all
the privileges conferred upon him by former Emperors.
Given at Constantinople, on the tenth of the Kalendsof March, during the
Consulate of Basilius and Vivianus, 463.
13. The Emperors Leo and Anthemius to Alexander, Praetorian Prefect.
As we consider the petition of the learned men of Alexandria, which they have
presented with reference to their bar and the Advocate of the Treasury, to be
reasonable, We decree, by this law, that their number shall consist of fifty;
that the name of each of them, according to the date of his membership, shall
be entered upon the register; and that they can give their professional
services to those requesting them, not only in the tribunal of the Illustrious
Augustal Prefect, but also in that of the Illustrious Governor of Egypt. The
advocates who are not included in the above-mentioned number can appear before
the other judges of the said city of Alexandria, and their sons shall be
preferred to other supernumeraries, when places in the Order become vacant.
The Advocate of the Treasury, who leaves his office after the lapse of two
years, shall, as a reward for his services, receive the office of consular
ruler of the province, and when circumstances demand it, the right and
authority to conduct cases not only for himself, but also for his children, his
parents, and his wife, as well as for persons related to him in the collateral
line as far as the fourth degree, shall not be denied him.
When, however, an Advocate of the Treasury dies, the one who is next in rank
shall be given his place, without delay, and the heirs of the deceased cannot
expect to derive any benefit for themselves on this account, and all the
privileges which are known to have been enjoyed by them up to this time, as
well as those which have been conferred by Your Highness, shall be preserved
intact and inviolate hereafter; and they can pass the rest of their lives in
leisure and peace, through the favor which We have shown them, and no civil
employment can be imposed upon them without their consent.
14. The Same to Callicrates, Praetorian Prefect of Illyria.
Advocates who explain ambiguous questions which arise in the course of
litigation, and who, by the ability of their defence, frequently, in both
private and public matters, restore the fortunes of those who have been ruined,
are not less useful to the human race than if they had preserved their country
and their relatives by taking part in battles, and receiving wounds. For We do
not think that those who are equipped as soldiers with swords, shields, and
cuirasses should be considered the only ones who protect Our Empire, but that
the advocates, also, who have charge of cases contend as soldiers, and,
trusting in the glorious power of eloquence, protect the hopes, the lives, and
the children of those who are distressed.
Given at Constantinople, on the fifth of the Kalendsof April, during the
Consulate of Zeno and Martian, 469.
15. The Emperor Leo to Dioscorus, Praetorian Prefect.
After the two Advocates of the Treasury who, in accordance with Our previous
Constitutions, are entitled to the same benefits, We decree that all the
present members of the bar, sixty-four in number, from the first to the sixty-
fourth, shall enjoy the advantages conferred by the Emperors, with which the
advocates of the Treasury and their children have been honored.
(1) We also order that if anyone, after having obtained the rank of Advocate of
the Treasury, should die, his salary for the entire year, from the time that he
began to discharge the duties of his office, shall be transmitted to his heirs
or successors, whether they are his children or strangers, and that he shall
have the power to make this disposition by will, or the money shall pass ab
intestato.
Given at Constantinople, on the seventeenth of the Kalendsof June, during the
Consulate of Festus and Martian, 472.
16. The Emperors Leo Junior and Zeno, to Justinian, Praetorian Prefect of the
City.
The fifteen advocates of your bar who, at the present time, hold the first rank
after the Advocate of the Treasury, shall, like the sixty-four who constitute
the bar of the Praetorian Prefecture, be entitled to the same privileges
bestowed by Our Indulgence that Advocates of the Treasury and their children
enjoy.
Given at Constantinople, on the seventeenth of the Kalendsof April, during the
Consulate of Leo Junior, 474.
17. The Emperor Zeno to Paulus, Praetorian Prefect of Illyria.
We order that the number of members of the bar in your jurisdiction shall be
limited to a hundred and fifty (as was formerly provided); and that this
number, whenever diminished by retirement from the profession, by death, or for
any other reason, shall be restored by your selection; so that, within two
years from the present time, the number shall be complete. The members shall be
admitted without examination as to whether they belong to some official
retinue, or are of any other inferior class; and any right of action to which
the bailiffs may be entitled against them will undoubtedly be extinguished, so
far as those who have filled the office of Advocates of the Treasury are
concerned. After the expiration of two years, however, those who desire to be
admitted to the bar in your jurisdiction cannot do so, until it has been proved
that they do not belong to the inferior class of subordinate officials.
(1) We order by this law, which shall be valid for all time, that all
privileges, without exception, which have been granted to Advocates of the
Prefecture of the East, whether by the Rescripts of former Emperors, by those
of Leo of glorious memory, or by Our own, shall be conferred upon the advocates
of your illustrious jurisdiction.
Given at Constantinople, on the sixth of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of Decius and Longinus, 486.


TITLE VIII. CONCERNING THE ADVOCATES OF DIFFERENT JUDGES.
1. The Emperor Anastasius to Eusebius, Master of the Offices.
We think that the suggestion of the illustrious Count of Private Affairs, and
the Proconsul of Asia, should be adopted, by which We have been informed that
the advocates of their bar have shown, by a petition presented by them, that
they greatly desire to obtain some mark of favor from Us, after having retired
from the practice of their profession. Therefore, We order that, after they
have ceased to perform their duties (as has already been stated), each of them
who is at present, or may afterwards be inscribed upon the registers in his
proper order, shall enjoy the dignity of count of the first rank, in order that
they may obtain in their retirement the fruit of their former labors; being
distinguished from the great body of men of a private condition by their
approved fidelity and industry as displayed towards their clients, and with
reason deserving to be numbered among those who are designated most
illustrious.
Given at Constantinople, on the eleventh of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of Anastasius, Consul for the second time, 497.
2. The Same to Thomas, Praetorian Prefect of Illyria.
We decree that the advocates of your bar who have been raised to the rank of
Advocates of the Treasury, in accordance with their merits, shall, with their
children already born, or who may hereafter be born, and their property, be
immune and free from all subordinate public employments, or the disabilities of
any inferior condition whatsoever; as it is established that this privilege has
already been granted by the Imperial Constitutions to the Advocates of the
Praetorian Prefecture of the East, as well as to that of this magnificent City,
and there is no doubt that the authority of your office is equal to that of the
Urban Prefect and that of the Prefect of the Orient.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Patricius and Hypatius.
3. The Same to Constantine, Praetorian Prefect.
We order that the chief of the advocates of the bar of the Illustrious Count of
the East shall perform the functions of Advocate of the Treasury for the term
of two years, and that for the said term he shall receive the salary granted
him by common consent; and that when this time has expired, and he retires from
the office, the number of the said advocates shall be fixed at only forty; so
that, if there should be any over and above this number belonging to the bar,
they shall be excluded from practice as advocates, and no one else shall be
added to them, to prevent the number of the said advocates from being more than
forty. Those who (as has already been determined), have relinquished the office
of Advocate of the Treasury, shall not afterwards be prevented from performing
the duties of their pro-
fession for themselves, their wives, their fathers and mothers-in-law, their
sons-in-law, their daughters-in-law, their children, their tenants, and their
slaves; nor shall their houses be subject to the charge of lodging surveyors;
but each of them can only claim this privilege for himself with reference to
the house in which he resides. So far as the tax called sportulaeis concerned,
no one can exact more than has been stated in Our notice, not only with
reference to the persons above mentioned, but also with reference to their
tenants and slaves, and no one shall have permission to exceed this amount.
The sons of advocates, whether their fathers are living or dead, or are still
in active practice, or have retired from the office of Advocate of the
Treasury, shall be preferred to strangers applying for the same office, and
shall be admitted free, and without any expense, if they (as has been decided),
have studied the science of jurisprudence for the prescribed time. However, in
order that the interests of those who had obtained the office of Advocate of
the Treasury, both dead as well as living, may be protected, and they may have
their salaries transferred to the heirs of those who have been called to the
office of Advocate of the Treasury, and be preserved for such as have already
retired from the said office or who afterwards may do so; and that they may
not, under any circumstances be compelled, against their will, to be liable to
any public charge, or be annoyed by being forced to appear or be brought into
court (unless by Our special command), We order that only when application is
made in a province to the distinguished Count of the East and he gives his
approval, they can be sued, and their case heard before a competent judge.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of
Sabinian and Theodore, 505.
4. The Same to Eustatius, Praetorian Prefect.
The calling of advocate is one which is praiseworthy and necessary to human
life, and it should, by all means, be remunerated with princely generosity.
Therefore We order that the illustrious Advocates of the Treasury belonging to
your bar shall receive their salaries on the solemn day of the Festival of the
Kalendsof January, only for the year during which they have discharged the
duties of their office, in the same manner as the illustrious Counts of Our
Consistory. After they have retired from office, if they have any freeborn
sons, the latter should be made members of the eminent body of notaries, and
receive the ordinary sacred epistles of the tribunes, without the payment of
any fee.
Where, however, any one of them is notified of a debt and acknowledges it, or,
an action having been brought against him, he is ready to confess judgment,
this should not be done before an appointed arbiter, but before the Advocates
of the Treasury, or either of them (if only one can be present), in the usual
manner.
Whenever anyone desires to render legitimate children who have been born, or
are not yet born of a marriage celebrated without dotal instruments, and by
common consent, this can be effected before the
Advocates of the Treasury, or either of them (as already has been stated), and
a record must be made of the act in such a way that the rights of absent
persons, if there are any, shall be preserved unimpaired. In addition to this,
when anyone wishes to confer emancipation upon his slaves before the consuls,
he can avail himself of his own services as advocate, and liberate said slaves
in the same manner before the Advocates of the Treasury.
We also decree that the other privileges mentioned, which already have been
bestowed upon the Advocates of the Treasury, or upon those who temporarily have
discharged the duties of the office in different ways, shall remain in full
force under this Our law.
Given at Constantinople, on the twelfth of the Kalendsof December, during the
Consulate of Ariovinius and Messala, 506.
5. The Same to Sergius.
We have decided that the petitions of the learned members of the Bar of the
Second Province of Syria should be granted, with some modifications, and We
order that their chief shall perform the functions of Advocate of the Treasury
for the term of two years, and that he receive the salary for the said term
which is authorized by common consent for that purpose; and that when the said
term has expired, he shall relinquish the office of advocate.
The number of said advocates shall be limited to only thirty, so that if there
are any over and above that number in the bar at present, they shall, by all
means, retire from the general practice of their profession, and no one shall
be added to them in order that the number of twenty advocates aforesaid may not
be exceeded.
Moreover (as has been already decided), those who have retired from the office
of advocate are not forbidden to continue to represent themselves, their wives,
their fathers and mothers-in-law, their sons and daughters-in-law, their own
children, their tenants, and the slaves which belong to them, in court; nor
shall they be subject to the inconvenience of having their houses used for the
lodging of surveyors, provided they are willing to claim for themselves this
privilege with reference to only a single house.
So far as the tax designated sportulaeis concerned, they cannot be compelled to
pay a greater amount than is specified in the notice which We have published;
and this rule applies not only to them, but also to their tenants and slaves;
nor shall anyone be admitted to their Order aforesaid, except those who are
known to have been engaged in the study of jurisprudence during the prescribed
time. The sons of advocates who are still in office, or of those who have
retired from the Treasury, whether they be living or dead, shall be preferred
to strangers applying for the same employment, and they shall be admitted
gratis, and without any expense, provided they (as has been established), have
studied law for the usual time.
Again, in order that the interests of those who have held the office of
advocate, or shall hold it hereafter, whether living or dead, may be protected,
We desire that their salaries shall be transmitted to the
heirs of any Advocate of the Treasury who has once been raised to that dignity,
and shall be preserved for them; and that those who have retired from the said
office, or may do so hereafter, shall, by no means, be compelled to undertake
any public charge against their will, or be annoyed by being compelled to be
produced, or brought into court (unless by Our special command), and if, in any
province in which they may be, they should be declared liable by a decree of
the Governor, only under such circumstances can they be sued and compelled to
defend themselves before a competent judge.
Given on the Kalendsof December, under the Consulate of Anatolius and Agapitus,
508.
6. The Emperor Justin to Marinus, Praetorian Prefect.
Sixty pounds of gold shall be paid to the illustrious Advocate of the Treasury,
which, under the Emperor Zeno of Divine memory, was fixed as the compensation
for ordinary judges and those persons appointed to determine the solvency of
sureties; the aforesaid Emperor, however, thought that this amount should be
reduced by half, and in order that, through Our Liberality, the illustrious
Advocates of the Treasury may obtain the above-mentioned sum of gold, without
fail, every year, it shall be divided equally between the two advocates of your
tribunal; for any privilege which, in accordance with the wish of all, is
conferred upon their chief, is also conferred upon the entire bar.
(1) In addition to this, We think that the sacred letters which are presented
to an illustrious praetorian tribune or notary for his approval, shall be
despatched not only in the name of one, but of both Advocates of the Treasury,
whether their own children or those of some other persons are concerned.
(2) We promise, moreover, that they shall be entitled to the same privileges
granted to those who are honored with the higher dignity; and that the document
bestowing them, even though made out in the name of only one, shall still
benefit another, with the consent of him who has obtained it, and therefore can
be issued to any person from their own province, or to one of their friends,
provided he resides therein.
(3) We also grant them permission to present every year the names of two men,
for the purpose of rendering homage to Us, and to be enrolled in Our body-
guard, one among the cavalry, and the other among the infantry, to replace
those who may have died; and no agreement shall be made for the purpose of
disposing of their positions as long as they live. Therefore, when these men
offer themselves for enrollment, the commanders of the guard shall pay them two
solidi,and no more, for every mile which they have come, and they are hereby
notified that only the customary sums, that is to say, what is usually allotted
to those who served, either in the cavalry or infantry, will be paid by their
distinguished commanders by way of compensation to the said inexperienced
recruits, without any other expenditure whatsoever.
(4) They shall also enjoy other privileges which have been conferred upon them
at different times, whether by Imperial Decrees or in accordance with the
regulations and decisions of your tribunal; but all who have been deemed worthy
of being selected by Us are entitled to greater favor than those who previously
have been appointed.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Constantine and Euthericus, 531.
7. The Same to Theodore, Praetorian Prefect.
We decree by this law that, until the number of members of your bar shall have
been reduced to eighty, no one can aspire to belong to it on any ground
whatever, except the sons of those who hold the rank of the first thirty, after
they have been instructed in eloquence; and they shall be admitted
gratuitously, and without the payment of any fee, or if they are strangers,
only two shall be admitted each year, who must themselves be conspicuous for
their eloquence and legal ability. After the number of advocates has been
reduced to eight, no one shall presume to exceed this number by the exercise of
either intrigue or duplicity.
(1) No one shall be permitted to change the order of precedence which is
indicated by the time of service, so that the young may succeed to the old, as
is the case where alterations are made with reference to the contracts of
merchants belonging to corporate bodies.
(2) We think that it also should be decided that none of them shall leave your
jurisdiction for the purpose of residing elsewhere; for all those who have
obtained the rank of advocate are notified that, if they should be absent from
this Most Sacred City for more than three years, the title of advocate and the
privileges of the order shall be taken from them, to prevent them from
absenting themselves from your jurisdiction, or making repeated voyages.
(3) If the most unimportant of these provisions should be violated at any time,
the twenty chiefs of this Order, who perform their duties under your
jurisdiction, as well as their assistants, shall each be punished by a fine of
ten pounds of gold, for the reason that they did not immediately invoke the aid
of the present law against the disobedience of Our Imperial commands, and
offered no resistance, and in no way prevented anything being done in
opposition thereto. And as the officials of your tribunal did not carefully
observe these salutary provisions, and did not take measures to prevent their
being infringed, they also shall pay a penalty of ten pounds of gold.
(4) Six hundred aureishall be set apart from the Treasury of your tribunal for
those who have exercised the office of Advocates of the Treasury, in your
jurisdiction, in accordance with the precedent of former times, in order that,
after the termination of their administration and of their glorious labors,
they may not come to want; and this sum shall not (as frequently happens), be
paid at an uncertain time, but it shall, without delay, come into their hands
when the half
of their term of service as Advocate of the Treasury has expired; that is to
say, on the Kalendsof October of each year.
(5) Any additional privileges that have been granted to this order by former
Emperors, or by the authority of any competent tribunal, shall remain
inviolate.
. (6) When an action is brought against any of these advocates, whether the
proceeding is a civil or a criminal one, or instituted here or in the
provinces, and it happens that the party is present at the prescribed time, the
bailiffs cannot collect anything as fees; and We decree that those who are
charged with prosecuting the case shall not think that any expenses can be
exacted of him either for interposing an exception, for preparing the case, or
on any other reason whatsoever.
Given at Constantinople, on the Idesof February, during the Consulate of
Justinian and Opilio, 524.
8. The Same to Archelaus, Praetorian Prefect.
No one, with the exception of Menander, Advocate of the Treasury, shall hope to
enjoy the advantages conferred upon Advocates of the Treasury when they have
obtained this office through cunning, or are proved to have done so without
having passed through the different degrees required for promotion.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Justinian and Opilio, 524.
9. The Emperor Justinian to John, Praetorian Prefect.
The Advocates of Illyria have asked Us whether the Constitution of Our Father,
Justin, of Divine Memory, promulgated with reference to the members of the bar
of your jurisdiction, is applicable to them, and that Our opinion thereon be
given, supposing they should be absent from your jurisdiction with or without
leave; and therefore We have ordered that this law shall apply to all of them
in general, so that if anyone should be absent continuously for more than three
years, without permission, or for more than five years with permission, his
name shall be struck from the roll of advocates, and he shall not be permitted
to claim his rank, or again be included among the most learned members of the
bar. Therefore, let the advocates of this jurisdiction comply with this Our
general decree.


TITLE IX. CONCERNING THE ADVOCATES OF THE TREASURY.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Claudius.
As you state that you have undertaken to defend the cause of the Treasury,
although you deny that you have received any compensation, you should,
nevertheless, comply with the rules, for those who represent the Treasury are
forbidden to give their services in any case against it.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of
Antoninus, Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
2. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to Frequentius.
You can, by Our authority, give your services to individuals against the
Government, provided you decline to conduct a case in which you appeared at the
time when you were the Advocate of the Treasury.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Valerian,
Consul for the second time, and Gallienus, 255.
3. The Emperor Constantine to Aelianus, Proconsul of Africa.
An Advocate of the Treasury, who does not wish to render himself liable to
punishment, must be careful not to neglect the interests of the Government; or,
where there are no grounds for it, presume, in the name of the Treasury, to
bring annoying actions against individuals.
Given at Constantinople, on the sixth of the Idesof November, during the
Consulate of Constantine and Licinius, Consuls for the fourth time, 315.
4. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Amianus, Count of
Private Affairs.
Officials who preside over cases in which private persons or the Government is
interested, must conduct the inquiry in the presence of the Advocate of the
Treasury.
Given on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of
Merobaudus and Saturninus, 383.


TITLE X.
CONCERNING THE ERRORS OP ADVOCATES AND THOSE WHO DRAW UP PETITIONS OR
APPLICATIONS.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Aurelia.
The allegations made by advocates in the presence of the parties to an action
shall be considered to be the same as if they had been made by the parties
themselves.1
Given on the Kalendsof March, under the Consulate of Albinus and Maximus, 228.
2. The Emperor Gordian to the Soldier Rogatus.
It is evident that the errors of those who draw up applications, that is to say
petitions, cannot prejudice the truth; and therefore, if it can be clearly
proved that the condemnation which you have mentioned in your petition did not
take place, he who is to take cog-
1 "Qui tacet consentire videtur." ---ED.
nizance of the matter will know that your allegations can cause you no injury.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Pius and
Pontianus, 239.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Ulpia.
When the case has been terminated by a decision, the latter cannot be set aside
by a rescript, for the rule which has been established, namely, that the error
of an advocate does not injure a litigant, cannot be of any benefit to you;
since, as you were present, and did not openly, and at once, that is to say
within the next three days, deny the allegations, and did not, after the
decision had been rendered, take advantage of an appeal in case you were
displeased with the decision.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.
TITLE XL
THE JUDGE MUST SUPPLY ANYTHING WHICH THE ADVOCATES OF THE PARTIES HAVE OMITTED.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Honoratus.
There is no doubt that where anything is omitted by the litigants in a case, or
by those who represent them, the judge can supply it, and state what he knows
to be in conformity with law and public justice.
Given on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of
Diocletian, Consul for the fifth time, and Maximian, Consul for the fourth
time, 293.


TITLE XII.
IN WHAT CASES INFAMY Is INCURRED.

1. The Emperor Severus and Antoninus to Manilius.
The disgrace of infamy will not be inflicted upon you by the mere fact that you
have been thrown into prison, or have been placed in chains, by order of the
judge.
No day or Consul given.

2. The Same to Venerius.
He who has been condemned to pay double damages by the Governor for having
exacted from his debtors more than was due, can not be considered to have been
convicted of theft, robbery with violence, or peculation.
Given on the third of the Idesof January, during the Consulate of Lateranus and
Rufinus, 298.

3. The Same to Metrodorus.
If you are said to have deserved a more severe sentence, and the Proconsul,
being induced by certain reasons, imposes a milder one, and orders you to be
removed from the rank of decurion for the term of two years, it is clear that
after it has elapsed, you will not be included in the number of persons who are
infamous, because the judge is considered to have remitted his prohibition
excluding you from the Order of Decurions after the expiration of two years.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of Lateranus
and Rufinus, 198.

4. The Same to Venustianus.
If you prove that Posidonius should have been relegated only for the term of a
year, and that the Proconsul has imposed an excessive sentence of temporary
exile for five years upon him, he must not be considered infamous, as the
severity of the sentence would appear to have reference to other additional
offences.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Saturninus
and Gallus, 199.


5. The Same to Ambrosius.
It is forbidden for decurions and their sons to be whipped with rods, but if
the illustrious Proconsul should decide that you have committed an injury
rendering you liable to such punishment, you will be branded with infamy.
Given on the Kalendsof July, under the Consulate of Saturninus and Gallus, 199.


6. The Same to Justus.
Those who are condemned to the public works for a certain time, retain their
former condition, but after the time has elapsed they will be subjected to the
penalty of infamy.
Given on the seventh of the Idesof December, during the Consulate of Geta and
Plautian, 204.


7. The Same to Demetrius.
No one becomes infamous for the reason that he has rejected his father's
estate.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof January, under the Consulate of Antoninus and
Geta, both Consuls for the second time, 206.


8. The Same to Ulpia.
If you have been condemned for theft, you will undergo the penalty for infamy,
without having been whipped. If property which someone else has stolen is found
in your possession, and you are not aware of the fact, a severe sentence will
not injure your reputation.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Antoninus
and Geta, both Consuls for the second time, 206.


9. The Same to Gaetus.
No one is branded with infamy for not having defended the public affairs of his
country.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Antoninus
and Geta, both Consuls for the third time, 209.


10. The Same to Severus.
Any one who is convicted of the offence of injury, even though committed
against a slave, is branded with infamy.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof August, during the same Consulate, 209.


11. The Emperor Alexander to Herennius.
Where debtors have surrendered their property, although it may be sold, they do
not become infamous for this reason.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Aelianus, 204.


12. The Same to Donatus.
When it is shown, by the decree of the Governor, that you have plundered an
estate, even if another penalty should be imposed upon you, you will not escape
the infamy attaching to the crime of theft.
Given on the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Julian, Consul for the
second time, and Crispinus, 225.


13. The Same to Juventius.
When a father reviles his sons in his will, this does not render them infamous
by law, but causes good and serious men to have a bad opinion of them, as
having displeased their father.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of
Alexander, Consul for the third time, and Dionysius, 230.


14. The Emperor Gordian to Jovinus.
Your uncle having been subjected to the penalty of whipping, as a torture for
crime committed, need not, on this account, apprehend the loss of reputation,
if he had not previously received a sentence branding him with infamy.
Given on the Kalendsof September, under the Consulate of Pius and Pontianus,
239.


15. The Same to Sulpitia.
The obligation of mourning exacted of women having been diminished by the
Decree of the Senate, they are excused from assuming sombre clothing, and
manifesting other indications of grief, but they are not permitted to contract
marriage within the period during which a wife usually mourns for her husband;
for even if a widow should be married within this time, not only she, but also
the man who know-
ingly married her, even though he be a soldier, becomes guilty of want of
decency, under the terms of the Perpetual Edict.
Given on the seventeenth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Gordian
and Aviola, 240.


16. The Same to Domitian.
It is clear that he who has been beaten with rods, and proclaimed by the public
crier to have been guilty of slander, in order that he may be branded as a
calumniator, becomes infamous for this reason.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Sabinus and
Venustus, 241.


17. The Same to Magnus.
An allegation inserted in a petition seems rather to cause reproach than to
blemish one's reputation; for when a statement is made out of court claiming
that you have committed calumny, and this statement is repeated by the judge
during the argument of the advocate, it does not, by any means, inflict infamy.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Atticus
and Praetexatus, 243.
18. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to Antiochus.
The Perpetual Edict not only renders persons infamous who have been convicted
of crime, but also anyone who has made an agreement with reference to it. In
cases of this kind, it has been decided that those have made such an agreement
who, with evil design and for the purpose of compromise, have paid money to an
adversary; he, however, who has done this without paying anything, shall suffer
no loss of reputation. If, however, the case should be decided by an oath, no
one can doubt that the party will be discharged after having been sworn by the
judge.
Given on the fourteenth of the Kalends ofJanuary, during the Consulate of
Secular, Consul for the second time, and Donatus, 261.


19. The Emperors Carinus and Numerian to Aristocratus.
The interruption of the Governor, which is the point to be decided, does not
seem to have rendered the person infamous concerning whom you have made
inquiry, since he was not specifically condemned for crime or violence, which
he committed, but only reprimanded, and warned by the Governor to lead a more
regular life hereafter.
Given on the seventeenth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of
Carinus, Consul for the second time, and Numerian, 284.


20. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Fortunatus.
Those who exercise the disgraceful occupation of usury, and unlawfully collect
interest on interest, should be branded with infamy.
Given on the seventeenth of the Kalendsof March, during the same Consulate,
284.


21. The Same, and the Caesars, to Statius.
If your brothers were minors when they exhibited themselves to the people in a
play, they will suffer no loss of reputation.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof September, during the same Consulate, 284.
22. The Same, and the Caesars, to Domitian.
Where a person who is associated with others is guilty of bad faith, and is
sued in his own name as a partner, and compelled to give satisfaction, he
incurs the risk of infamy.
Given at Nicomedia, on the sixth of the Idesof December, during the Consulate
of the Caesars.



TITLE XIII. CONCERNING ATTORNEYS.

1. The Divine Antoninus Pius to Severus.
A bond for the ratification of the transaction is required of an attorney, when
it is uncertain whether or not he has received authority from his principal.
Given on the fourth of the Idesof October, during the Consulate of Gallicanus
and Venustus, 151.


2. The Divine Brothers to Sextilia.
As you allege that the case is a pecuniary one, you can answer the appeal of
your adversary by your husband, after the prescribed formalities have been
complied with, for, in pecuniary cases, appeals can be made by either of the
litigants through attorneys.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof August, during the same Consulate, 163.


3. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Pomponius.
Summon the person who transacts the business of the heirs from whom you allege
a trust is due to you before the illustrious Praetor, and he will be compelled
to answer you, or he will be forbidden to administer their affairs according to
the legal practice of the jurisdiction; and if the heirs are not defended, the
Praetor will ascertain whether he should give you possession, according to the
custom which prevails where parties do not make a defence.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of Chilo
and Libo, 205.


4. The Same to Saturninus.
For the reason that you allege that judgment was rendered against you during
your absence, it is just that you should have an opportunity to defend
yourself, and you cannot be opposed on the ground that your wife was present
when the judgment was rendered, or even that she acquiesced in it; as the
business of others cannot be transacted
by women as attorneys, unless the actions in which they are ordered to appear
relate to their own property and advantage.
Given on the day before the Nonesof January, during the Consulate of Aper and
Maximus, 208.


5. The Emperor Antoninus to Pancratia.
It has been provided by the Perpetual Edict that an action must be refused to
anyone who desires to act in the name of an absent person, if he does not
defend him in a counter action.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of the two
Aspers, 215.


6. The Emperor Alexander to Martian.
It is well known that where anyone is accused of crime, he cannot undertake the
defence of a case before, establishing his own innocence.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Aelianus, 224.


7. The Same to Macrinus.
A soldier cannot act as attorney either for his father, his mother, or his
wife, even under the authority of a rescript; as the public welfare does not
permit him to undertake the defence of another, or transact business, or act as
advocate.
Given on the eighth of the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Aelianus, 224.


8. The Same to Mansuetus.
Anyone who authorizes you to collect a debt for him cannot engage another to do
so before issue has been joined.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Maximus, Consul for the second time, and Aelianus, 224.


9. The Same to Aufidius.
Soldiers can attend to their own affairs without committing a breach of
discipline, nor can it be said that he transacts the business of another who
honorably and faithfully, and for some good reason, conducts suits which have
been entrusted to his care; for when a right of action has been transferred to
him by another, in good faith, there is no doubt that he is transacting his own
business, and to forbid My soldiers to do this would not only be absurd, but
unjust.


10. The Same to Castia.
When an attorney especially appointed for one purpose exceeds his directions,
anything that he does can, in no way, prejudice his principal. If, however, he
has full power to act, a decision in the case cannot be rescinded, for if any
fraud has been committed, you will not be prevented from suing him in the
ordinary manner.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof March, under the Consulate of Albinus and
Maximus, 228.


11. The Same to Sebastian.
Neither guardians nor curators can personally appoint an attorney to transact
the business of their wards or minors, but they can appoint an agent. A ward or
an adult of either sex can, however, with the authority of his or her guardian
or curator, appoint an attorney either to bring a suit, or to defend it.
Moreover, guardians and curators themselves, like attorneys, are not forbidden
to appoint attorneys after legal proceedings have been instituted.
Given on the day before the Idesof May, during the Consulate of Alexander,
Consul for the third time, and Dio, 230.


12. The Same to Frontonus.
Two reasons exist for not rendering it necessary for a mandate to be required
of your son, who offers himself to defend you; because anyone, whether he be a
freedman or a stranger, can defend another without a mandate, where security is
given for the defence, and another formality elsewhere mentioned is complied
with; and for the reason that a son who, of his own accord, conducts a case in
the name of his father, is not obliged to prove that he has been ordered to do
so. And, indeed, if your son has not yet attained his majority, the judge
should not unjustly deprive him of the duty of acting as attorney; for it is
much more equitable to hear a defender of this kind than to impose a severe
penalty upon you for being contumacious, and not providing for your defence
during your absence.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Agricola
and Clementinus, 231.


13. The Emperor Gordian to the Soldier Lucian.
You can begin an action which your mother directed you to bring, if, when you
institute proceedings in her name, an exception is not interposed on the ground
of military service, because it cannot be pleaded against you when an appeal is
taken; but if nothing has yet been done, the terms of the Perpetual Edict will
not permit you to bring suit in the name of another.
Given on the third of the Idesof January, during the Consulate of Gordian and
Aviola, 240.


14. The Same to Sabinian.
Ajudgment rendered against you is none the less valid by law for the reason
that your adversary is under the age of twenty-five years and cannot, without
the consent of a curator, entrust her husband with the conduct of her case; for
while age affords a good reason for relief in cases where minors sustain
injury, it is not customary to plead it where they have profited by the
transaction.
Given on the third of the Nonesof October, during the Consulate of Gordian,
Consul for the second time, and Pompeianus, 242.


15. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Cornificius.
You have stated clearly in your petition that you have, contrary to good
morals, purchased a lawsuit. Although, for anyone voluntarily to act as
attorney (which office should be gratuitous), is not an unlawful transaction,
an act of this kind cannot be undertaken without exposing the person to blame.
Given on the third of the Nonesof April, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
294.


16. The Same, and the Caesars, to Paconia.
It is perfectly clear and certain that an attorney or agent who has charge of a
tract of land, and has not received a special order to sell it, has no right to
dispose of the property of his principal; and, therefore, if you purchased this
land from persons who alienated it without the consent of the owner, you will
perceive that you have no right to have the title to said property transferred
to you by means of a purchase of this kind.
Given at Byzantium, on the Nonesof April, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
294.


17. The Same, and the Caesars, to Mardonius.
No one can be compelled to act as attorney against his consent, or to do so
longer than is stated in the instrument giving him authority; and he is not
obliged to undertake the defence of an absent party, as it is sufficient for
him to carry out that with which he was entrusted.
Given at Philippopolis, on the sixth of the Nonesof July, during the Consulate
of Diocletian, Consul for the fifth time, and Maximian, 294.


18. The Same, and the Consuls, to Dionysia.
To undertake the legal defence of another is a masculine duty, and it
is settled that it cannot be discharged by one of the female
sex;[[fn--1]] and therefore you must apply for the appointment of a
guardian for your son, if he is a minor.  Given on the fourteenth of
the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of the Caesars, 294.


[[fn--1 "Foeminae ab omnibus officiis civilibus, vel publicis remotae
sunt; ei ideo nec judices esse possunt, nec magistratum gerere, nec
postulare, nec pro alio intervenire, nec procuratores existere."
---ED.]]


19. The Same, and the Caesars, to Firmus.
Where you have paid the price of a tract of land, or a slave, to an agent who
sold it to you without the order of the owner of the same, and the consent of
the latter neither preceded nor followed the contract of sale; and the
Governor, after proper investigation,
should ascertain that the price of said property has been employed for the
benefit of the owner, he shall order it to be returned to you.
Given on the day before the Idesof March, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
294.


20. The Same to Verrinus, Governor of Syria.
We hold that it makes no difference whether the business was transferred to the
care of the attorney before or after legal proceedings were instituted.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Demessus.


21. The Emperor Constantine to the Council of the Province of Africa.
A husband has a perfect right to undertake the management of the affairs of his
wife without any mandate, where he furnishes security in a proper manner, and
observes the other requisite formalities; in order that women, in the attempt
to conduct their cases, may not, by being bold, incur contempt for the modesty
of their sex, and be compelled to appear in the assemblies of men, or in court.
If, however, anyone should undertake to execute a mandate, even though he be a
husband, he cannot exceed what his power of attorney prescribes.
Given on the fourth of the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Constantine
and Licinius Caesar, both Consuls for the second time, 312.


22. The Same to Bassus, Urban Prefect.
Where attorneys have been appointed, and are charged with the conduct of a case
after the joinder of issue, those who authorize them to do so have no power to
take an active part in the proceedings, unless deadly enmity should arise
between them, or other motives should exist, or some necessary cause arise; for
then the case can be transferred to them, even against the consent of the
attorneys.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of
Constantine and Licinius-Caesar, 312.


23. The Emperor Julianus to Secundus, Praetorian Prefect.
There is no doubt that, after the case has been brought into court, and the
attorney obtains control of the same, it can be conducted to a conclusion, even
after the death of the party who directed the action to be brought or defended;
and the ancient jurists have even held that he can, in this instance, appoint
an attorney.
Given on the second of the Nonesof February, during the Consulate of Julianus,
Consul for the fourth time, and Sallust, 363.


24. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Pancratius, Urban
Prefect.
Even though the authority of the attorney should be established in the
beginning of the action, and it should be shown that he has
been directed by the principal in the action to take charge of it, still, if
the authority of the attorney is ascertained to be fraudulent, the controversy
is not usually decided, nor will a judgment, if rendered, stand.
Given at Constantinople, on the second of the Kalendsof April, during the
Consulate of Antoninus and Syagrius, 382.


25. The Emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius, to Tatian, Praetorian
Prefect.
Where anyone has attained the dignity of Praetor, Prefect of the City, General
of the Army, Count of the Consistory, or has dispensed justice as Proconsul, or
administered public affairs as Imperial Vicegerent, and an action is to be
brought or defended by him, he has the right to appoint an attorney to
represent him.
If anyone transgresses the provisions of this law, and suit is brought against
him, he shall lose his case if he did not make provision for its defence by an
attorney; and any judge who violates them is warned that he will be compelled
to pay twenty pounds of gold, and that the same amount shall be exacted from
his subordinates.
Given on the eighteenth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of
Arcadius, Consul for the second time, and Rufinus, 392.


Extract from Novel 71, Chapter I. Latin Text.
This decree only has reference to illustrious persons, for others are subject
to the Common Law.

26. The Emperors Arcadius, Honorius, and Theodosius to Anthemius, Praetorian
Prefect.
In pecuniary disputes, even though no rule or decree may have been formulated
on this point, We grant power to everyone, indiscriminately, to answer by an
attorney, if he prefers to do so; unless for some good reason, or where matters
are urgent, the judge requires him to appear in person.
Given on the day before the Idesof October.


TITLE XIV.
PERSONS IN AUTHORITY ARE NOT PERMITTED TO APPOINT ADVOCATES FOR LITIGANTS, OR
TO HAVE THEIR RIGHTS OP ACTION TRANSFERRED TO THEM.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Aristobolus.
Our Father, the Divine Claudius, who was thoroughly learned in the law, very
properly decided that those who committed their defence to persons in authority
should be punished with the loss of their cases; in order that suits might be
determined on their merits, rather than by the influence of powerful persons.
It is clear that he intended that, in actions in which people of the provinces
were interested, the
Governors should be charged with the punishment of violations of this law, and
that they should impose severe sentences upon the agents or attorneys who had
been employed in such matters either through favor, or by the payment of money;
and therefore as it is to the interest of all, and especially to that of those
in moderate circumstances, who are often oppressed by the unfortunate
interference of persons in authority, you must hear the applications of the
litigants, and not fear that you may involve persons of high rank; as the
Divine Claudius specially decided that the Governors of provinces should decide
questions of this kind, and if circumstances demanded it, should inflict
punishment.
Given on the fourth of the Idesof September, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors, one Consul for the third time, and the other Consul for the
second time, 287.
2. The Emperors Arcadius, Honorius, and Theodosius to John, Praetorian Prefect.
If rights of action of this kind should be transferred to powerful persons, the
creditors shall be punished with the loss of their claims; for the rapacity of
creditors becomes apparent when they assign their rights of action to others.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof July, during the Consulate of Honorius, Consul
for the seventh time, and Theodosius, Consul for the second time, 407.


TITLE XV.
CONCERNING THOSE WHO PLACE UPON THEIR LANDS
PAPERS BEARING THE NAMES OP POWERFUL PERSONS, OR
WHO MAKE USE OF THE NAMES OF SUCH PERSONS IN
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS.
1. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Messala, Praetorian Prefect.
We have been informed that there are many individuals who, aware of the
desperation of their unjust claims, make use of the names of powerful persons,
and the privileges of those invested with the highest rank, in opposition to
the parties by whom they are summoned to court; and in order to prevent fraud
being committed against the laws, and adversaries from being terrified by the
abuse of such names and titles, We decree that those who, knowingly, connive at
a deception of this kind, shall be branded with infamy; but if they have not
given them their consent, and papers or documents containing their names have
been affixed to the houses of others, without their knowledge, those who are
guilty shall be scourged, and sentenced to perpetual labor in the mines.
Therefore, when any defendant who is the possessor of the property in dispute
and of the title to the same, and can plead a properly formulated exception in
opposition to the claim brought against him, and who believes that the name of
another has been inserted in the petition or complaint of the plaintiff; the
latter
shall be punished by the loss of the possession, or of the case which he
attempted to gain or avoid by means of this fraud, and he shall not have the
power to bring his action a second time, even if the merits of the case appear
to be on his side; and those who voluntarily permit their names to be used in
the actions of others, when they themselves have no right either of possession
or ownership, shall be branded with infamy as persons who have thrown away
their reputations, and are the purchasers of fraudulent litigation.
Given at Milan, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof December, during the
Consulate of Stilicho and Aurelian, 400.
TITLE XVI.
No PRIVATE PERSON SHALL PLACE THE IMPERIAL INSIGNIA UPON HIS OWN PREMISES OR
UPON THOSE OF ANOTHER, OR SHALL RAISE THE IMPERIAL STANDARD OVER THEM.
1. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Flavianus, Praetorian Prefect.
It is the exclusive privilege of Imperial Majesty that Our houses and
possessions should be indicated by the display of Our titles, and therefore let
all persons know that everything upon which Our name appears becomes public
property.
Given at Ravenna, on the third of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate
of Bassus and Philip, 408.
2. The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian to Florentius, Praetorian Prefect.
Let no one presume to raise the royal standard or insignia upon the land of
another, without the order of a competent judge, no matter who the person may
be, or under what title he holds possession; even though it may be established
that he is not the owner, or an unjust possessor, or a rash trespasser, who has
possession of the property. We decree that if he who does this is a plebeian,
he shall be subjected to the extreme penalty; if he is a man of illustrious
rank, a decurion, a soldier, or a member of the clergy, his property shall be
confiscated, and he shall not only be deported from the City of Rome, but he
shall also be deprived of his freedom, and all judges shall see that this law
is executed.
We grant authority not only to those to the injury of whom an act of this kind
has been committed, in violation of right and of the laws, but to all their
children and slaves, without the fear of false accusation or of prosecution for
crime, to remove or deface the insignia, and even to destroy the standards
above mentioned; and We also decree that the judges and their subordinates
shall be fined thirty pounds of gold, if they permit an accusation of this kind
to be made, or anyone to sign it.
Given on the fifteenth day of July, during the Consulate of Theodosius, Consul
for the seventeenth time, and Festus, 439.


TITLE XVII.
No ONE SHALL BE PERMITTED TO PLACE A SEAL UPON PROPERTY BELONGING TO ANOTHER,
WITHOUT THE AUTHORITY OP A JUDGE.
1. The Emperor Probus to Octavius.
It has been frequently stated in Rescripts that, before judgment has been
rendered, a seal cannot be attached to property in the possession of another;
and therefore you are permitted to break seals which have been unlawfully
placed upon property or crops in your possession, so that after they have been
removed, the action which has been brought against you may be decided.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Probus,
Consul for the second time, and Lupus, 278.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Crangasius.
No one can attach his seal to property which is in the possession of another,
even if he alleges that the said property is his, or has been encumbered to
him.


TITLE XVIII.
NEITHER THE TREASURY NOR THE STATE SHALL PROVIDE AN ATTORNEY TO DEFEND ANYONE
IN COURT.
1. The Emperor Gordian to Legitimus and Others.
You are making a request contrary to the rule of law, when you ask that the
State shall assist you, under the pretext that you owe it a certain sum of
money.
Given on the third of the Idesof January, during the Consulate of Gordian,
Consul for the second time, and Pompeianus, 242.
2. The Same to Tertullus.
When you state that you are willing to give to the Treasury half of certain
property, or half of the interest in an action which you are entitled to bring,
you are notified that the discipline enforced during My reign does not permit a
donation of this kind to be accepted; and therefore, your right, if you have
one, must be exercised in accordance with the usual legal formalities, without
subjecting My Treasury to odium.
Given on the sixth of the Nonesof August, during the Consulate of Gordian,
Consul for the second time, and Pompeianus, 242.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Amphio.
It is repugnant to the laws of Our reign for the Treasury to provide an
attorney against private persons, under the pretext of a debt which is due to
it.
Given at Philippopolis, on the eighth of the Kalendsof January, under the
Consulate of the Caesars, 294.
4. The Same, and the Caesars, to Achilles.
It is not proper to ask, contrary to the peace of Our reign, that, for the
purpose of defrauding creditors, Our Treasury shall be subjected to obloquy.
Therefore pay what you owe to Our Treasury, and if suit is brought against you
by your creditor to recover a sum of money which you deny has ever been paid to
you, you can, according to the law, avail yourself of an exception on the
ground that the money had not been counted out to you.
Given on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.


TITLE XIX.
CONCERNING THE ACTION BASED ON VOLUNTARY AGENCY.


1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Sopatra.
As you have accused the guardians of your children as being liable to
suspicion, and as you request that guardians or curators shall be appointed for
them, you have performed the duty dictated by affection, and therefore the
action of voluntary agency will not lie in order to enable you to recover the
expense which you have incurred in this proceeding; for when anyone has made
disbursements for others through family attachment, he cannot, under any
circumstances, recover them.
Given on the third of the Nonesof October, during the Consulate of Dexter and
Priscus, 197.

2. The Same to Rufina.
It has been established for the benefit of minors that if anyone has transacted
their business to their advantage, when the necessity was urgent, an action
should be granted against them to the extent to which they may have profited.
The expense which you allege you have incurred in behalf of the minor by taking
him to Rome for the purpose of having guardians appointed for him, is granted
you by law; if his maternal aunt does not prove that she was ready to have this
done on her own responsibility.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of Lateranus
and Rufinus, 198.

3. The Same to Hadrian.
If you have paid a sum of money for your brother, who is your co-heir, you can
avail yourself of the action based on voluntary agency, and if you have been
compelled to pay a debt in full, for the purpose of releasing a pledge, you
will be entitled to bring this action; or you can collect what is due to you by
a suit in partition, if
judgment has not already been rendered in an action of this kind brought
between you.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of Anulinus
and Fronto, 200.

4. The Same to Claudius.
Anyone who undertakes to transact the business of a minor, by the direction of
her guardian, is not considered to have done so in the place of her guardian,
but he will be liable to the ward in an action based on voluntary agency.
Given on the third of the Nonesof December, during the Consulate of Fabianus
and Mutianus, 202.

5. The Same to Triphonius.
Where a freedman has transacted the business of a daughter of his patron as a
mark of respect, he will not have the right to bring an action against her on
the ground of voluntary agency.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Geta and
Plautian, 204.

6. The Same to Gallus.
You say that a curator was appointed for you by your father's will, which does
not appear to have been legally done; and if (as you allege), he has interfered
with the administration of the estate, an action on the ground of voluntary
agency will lie in your favor against him as well as his heirs.
Given during the Consulate of Aper and Maximus, 208.

7. The Emperor Antoninus to Euphrata.
Where you have been appointed heir to two-twelfths of his estate by the person
who transacted your business; even if you should enter upon the estate, you
will be entitled to a suit against your co-heir to recover the remaining ten-
twelfths, provided you had this right of action against the deceased.
Given at Rome, on the sixth of the Idesof March, during the Consulate of
Sabinus and Anulinus, 217.

8. The Same to Sallust.
If Julian collected a sum of money from your debtor and you ratified the
payment of the same, you will be entitled to an action against him on the
ground of business transacted.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Praesens and
Extricatus.

9. The Same, and the Caesars, to Severus.
You have a right to bring the civil suit based on voluntary agency against
those who have administered your affairs, and your rights will not be
prejudiced if you have delayed bringing it because you belong to the army, as
this kind of an action is only extinguished by the prescription of long time.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulship of Antoninus
and Aventus, 219.

10. The Emperor Alexander to Secundus and Others.
If you take care of a sick slave belonging to another, who is known to be
useful to his master, you have transacted business for the latter to his
advantage, and you can recover your expenses by this action.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Alexander, Consul for the second time, and Marcellus, 227.

11. The Same to Herennia.  You have no good reason to ask that the
expense of the maintenance which you have furnished your children
shall be repaid to you, as by doing so, you have only discharged the
obligation demanded by maternal affection. If, however, you have
expended any money for the advantage, or probable benefit of their
business, and can prove that your act was not prompted by your
generosity as a mother, but with the intention of being reimbursed for
what you paid, you can collect it by means of the action based on
voluntary agency.  Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof February,
during the Consulate of Albinus and Maximus, 231.

12. The Same to Theophilus.
'If a son should discharge a debt for his father, he will not be entitled to an
action to recover the amount which he paid, whether he was under paternal
control at the time he made the payment, or was independent, provided he paid
the money as a donation; and therefore, if your father, being his own master
and transacting business for his father, paid his debt without having been
directed to do so, you can bring an action on the ground of voluntary agency,
against your paternal uncles.
Given on the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Agricola
and Clement, 225.
13. The Same to Aquilia.
You cannot recover from your father-in-law any expenses which you have incurred
on account of your wife's illness, as you should have expended the money
because of your affection for her. You have, however, a legal right to bring
suit for her funeral expenses against her father, to whom her dowry was given,
if you paid them with the intention of recovering them.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of Agricola
and Clement, 231.
14. The Same to Mutianus Rufus.
If you obeyed the mandate of the husband alone, and transacted his business as
well as that of his wife, an action will lie in your favor as well as in that
of the wife, on the ground of business transacted; and the husband who directed
you to do this will be entitled
to the action on mandate against you, and you also can bring the counter action
against him to recover any expenses which you may have incurred.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Urbanus, 225.
15. The Emperor Gordian to Eutychiamis.
If, influenced by paternal affection, you have furnished means of support to
your daughter-in-law, or have paid out money as salaries to teachers, you will
have no right to recover such expenses. Where, however, you have expended
anything for your daughter-in-law with the intention of recovering it, you will
have the right to bring an action on the ground of voluntary agency.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof July, during the Consulate of Gordian and
Aviola, 240.
16. The Emperors Gallus and Volusianus to Eutychianus.
If, while transacting your sister's business, you paid any taxes for her,
either by her direction, or because she requested you to do so, you can recover
what you prove that you paid, by an action based on voluntary agency or by the
action of mandate.
Given on the eleventh of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Gallus and
Volusianus, 240.
17. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Claudia.
The successors of a curator, who have been sued in an equitable action based on
voluntary agency, are liable for fraud as well as gross negligence; but they
are not obliged to continue the administration, and therefore it is established
that they have no authority to alienate any property belonging to the ward.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the above-mentioned
Consulate, 293.
18. The Same, and the Caesars, to Pomponius.
Good faith requires the payment of interest on expenses incurred in transacting
the business of others, and you have also the right to bring this action
against those whose affairs you allege you have been compelled to transact.
Given on the ninth of the Kalendsof January, during the above-named Consulate,
293.
19. The Same, and the Caesars, to Alexander.
Where property owned in common, which forms part of an estate, is sold by one
of the heirs, his co-heir, who has ratified the sale, can bring an action
against him on the ground of voluntary agency, to recover his share of the
price.
20. The Same, and the Caesars, to Octaviana.Anyone who, without a mandate,
attends to the business of another, is not considered to resemble a guardian or
curator, as the latter
necessarily cease to administer their trust when their duties are ended, but
the former can relinquish his whenever he chooses; and he performs his duty
sufficiently and thoroughly if he consults the interest of his friend in one or
more transactions.
In accordance with this, where anyone voluntarily manages the property of
another, when he is neither his guardian nor his curator, as he is responsible
not only for fraud and gross negligence but also for slight negligence, he can
be sued by you, and compelled to return with interest what is proved to be due
from him to you; but so far as others who are indebted to you are concerned, he
will not be liable, because he cannot proceed against them on account of the
exception which may be interposed; and therefore you should prosecute your
claims against those who you say are indebted to you.
21. The Same, and the Caesars, to Michra.
If your blood-relatives have manumitted their slaves, and you assert that they
have managed your property, this is no reason why their freedom should not be
granted. Moreover, there is no doubt that you cannot bring suit to recover
them, after their manumission, on account of some act which was not connected
with the management of the property either before or after their liberation,
but was distinct from it.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof October, under the Consulate
of the Caesars, 264.
22. The Same, and the Caesars, to Eulogius.
Those who transact the business of others cannot be held liable for accidents,
in the absence of any special agreement providing for it.
Given on the eleventh of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 364.
23. The Same, and the Caesars, to Theodore.
The action based on voluntary agency is not a real, but a personal one.
Given at Nicomedia, on the twelfth of the Kalendsof December, during the
Consulate of the Caesars, 264.
24. The Emperor Justinian to John.
Where anyone has interfered with the administration of the affairs of another,
against the consent of the owner of the property, who has even forbidden him to
do so, a doubt is entertained by certain eminent authorities whether such a
person has a right to bring suit against the said owner to recover expenses
which he had incurred with reference to it; and some of them declare that a
direct or an equitable action can be brought by him, and others (among whom was
Salvius Julianus), deny that this can be done, but now We, in deciding the
question, and in accordance with the opinion of Julianus, order that if the
owner of the property was opposed to the other transacting his business, and
forbade him to do so, he can bring
neither a direct nor an equitable action against him; that is to say, after
notice had been given him by the owner that he did not authorize him to attend
to his affairs, even though he may have done so advantageously. Then, if the
owner should find that a considerable amount of money had been properly
expended, and fraudulently pretending not to be aware of it, he should forbid
the party in question to transact his business, in order to prevent him from
being reimbursed his expenses previously incurred, We, by no means, suffer this
to be done, but direct that no action will lie in his favor to recover money
spent for improvements, after the time when he was notified, whether this was
done in writing or not, where other persons were called to witness that the
notice was given; and with reference to expenses previously incurred, if they
were beneficial, We permit the agent to bring suit against the owner in the
ordinary way.
Given on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Lampadius and Orestes, 538.



TITLE XX.
CONCERNING ACTS PERFORMED THROUGH THE INFLUENCE OF FORCE OR FEAR.

1. The Emperor Alexander to Felix.
The opinion has been given that the right to pursue property which has been
taken by violence or theft, even if it has been afterwards destroyed, remains
unimpaired under the law.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Aelianus, 224.

2. The Same to Alexander.
As you acknowledge that you not only gave security to pay a sum of money, but
that you also have paid it, it is not clear why you ask that it shall be
returned to you because you have been subjected to violence, when it is not
probable that you would have hastened to make payment without complaining that
the note was forcibly extorted, unless you allege that you also suffered
violence when you paid the money.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Alexander,
Consul for the eleventh time, and Marcellus, 227.

3. The Emperor Gordian to Gaius.
Where your grandfather was compelled, either by force or fear, to sell a
certain tract of land, and then the purchaser sold it to another, if you have
become the heir of your grandfather, you have a right to appear before the
Governor of the province, and petition that the land be restored to you, after
the price has been returned; since it has been decided that, in a case of this
kind, a real action should be granted in accordance with the terms of the
Perpetual Edict, provided the person who purchased the land in the second place
cannot rely upon the prescription of long-continued possession.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof August, during the Consulate of Pius and
Pontianus, 239.

4. The Same to Primus and Enthydicus.
If a sale is extorted from you either by force, or the fear of death or bodily
injury, and your consent was not afterwards given to it, and you bring suit
within a year in accordance with the terms of the Perpetual Edict (during which
time you have a right to proceed), and the property is not restored to you, you
can recover a judgment for quadruple damages; of course, after having returned
the purchase-money. When a year has elapsed, however, if proper cause is shown,
the same action can be brought for simple damages, but it has been decided that
this suit will only be available where another will not lie.
Given on the third of the Nonesof August, during the Consulate of Gordian and
Aviola, 240.

5. The Same to the Soldier Rufus.
It makes no difference by whom violence has been exerted against your father
and your paternal uncle to compel them to sell their property, or whether force
or fear has been employed by the purchaser or by someone else with his
knowledge, for if they were impelled by violence to sell their property for
less than it was worth, they can cause what has been improperly done to be
restored to its former condition.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of Gordian
and Aviola, 294.

6. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Pollia.
It is not necessary for any office which a man may hold to cause him injury;
therefore, you are advised that the senatorial dignity of your adversary is not
alone sufficient to cause the fear by which you allege the contract has been
entered into.
Given at Heraclea, on the third of the Kalendsof May, under the Consulate of
the Caesars, 294.

7. The Same, and the Caesars, to Cotus.
If you can prove in the presence of the Governor of the province that an
instrument calling for a donation, a compromise, a stipulation, or any other
kind of an obligation or contract, has been extorted by the fear of death or
bodily injury, or through apprehension caused by threats of death, he will not,
in accordance with the terms of the Edict, suffer the contract to stand.
Given on the second of the Nones ofJanuary, during the same Consulate, 299.

8. The Same, and the Caesars, to Tryphoninus.
As you have sold your house and garden with the expectation of recovering an
obligation which you have executed with reference to
certain grain, and you allege that you only agreed to the said sale for fear of
not being appointed to civil office, and that you now wish to rescind the sale
under the pretext that it was made through fear, understand that apprehension
of this kind will be of no advantage to you for the purpose of annulling such a
contract.
Given on the eleventh of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 300.

9. The Same, and the Caesars, to Hymnoda.
It is established that fear must not only be proved by threats and disputes,
but by the violence of the act.
Given on the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the Caesars, 300.

10. The Same and the Caesars, to Faustina.
You ask that an alienation or a promise which has been made through fear of
prosecution which has been begun against you, or which may be brought
hereafter, shall be rescinded, and this is an improper request.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 302.

11. The Emperor Constantine to Evagrius, Praetorian Prefect.
If anyone, merely apprehensive of the influence of a person holding an
office of trifling importance, should be induced to sell him property
belonging to himself, situated in the same province or place where he
is discharging the duties of his office, what has been purchased shall
be returned, and the purchase-money may even be retained; and those
who have acquired anything by extortion through making an improper use
of the names of their wives and friends shall be liable to a similar
penalty.  Given at Aquileia on the Kalendsof October, during the
Consulate of Constantius, Consul for the seventh time, and the Caesar
Constantine, 353.

12. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to the People.
We order that all sales, donations and compromises which have been extorted by
the improper exercise of authority shall be void.1
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of the
Same Emperors; the first, Consul for the eighth time, and the second, Consul
for the third time, 409.
1 The ancient Hindus had well-defined ideas of the illegality of whatever was
obtained by duress: "What is given by force to a man who cannot accept it
legally, what is by force enjoyed, by force caused to be written; and all other
things done by force or against free consent, Menu has pronounced void." (Sir
Wm. Jones Works, The Laws of Menu III, Page 299.) --- ED.
TITLE XXI. CONCERNING FRAUD.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Clementina.
When a surety, having paid the amount of the debt and interest, purchases the
pledges from the creditor, he ought to restore to you the ownership of the
same, together with any profits which he may have honestly collected, in order
to avoid exposing himself to an action for fraud arising from breach of faith.
Given on the third of the Idesof May, during the Consulship of Plautian and
Geta, 294.
2. The Emperor Antoninus to Agrippa.
The action for fraud is permitted, after proper cause is shown, when no other
will lie.
Given on the Nonesof November, during the Consulate of Gentian and Bassus, 212.
3. The Emperor Gordian to Aquilinus.
The delays which are usually granted in an action for fraud cannot be counted
against you while you were engaged in business for the State (which you allege
is the case), as the time will only commence to run against you from the day on
which, having been released from your official duties, you began to have the
power to act within the prescribed time.
Dated on the Idesof August, during the Consulate of Sabinus, Consul for the
second time, and Venustus, 241.
4. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Menander.
As you state that it was agreed between yourself and the person who you say had
formed a connection with a female slave that he should give you a male slave in
her stead, you understand that if you have manumitted her, or have delivered
her to him, and he has manumitted her, you have not the power to revoke her
freedom; but if the time has not yet expired, and the other party has violated
the contract, you can ask that an action for fraud be granted you.
If, however, you still have the ownership of the said slave, and you should
appear before the Governor of the province, you can recover her with her
children, if no question should arise as to her status.
Given at Heraclea on the third of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of
the Caesars, 294.
5. The Same, and the Caesars, to Amphidrosa.
If you, through emancipation, have become your own master, during the lifetime
of your father, and have succeeded to the estate of your mother, and have
compromised with your father in good faith,
and he, after having administered your property as your lawful guardian, has
manumitted you, you are advised that if a simple agreement has been made
between you, your claim will be barred by an exception, but if a novation has
been concluded with the proper formalities, and a release has followed, you
will not be entitled to any action. Where, however, you have been greatly
injured by the exercise of the deliberation solemnly accorded by you for the
novation and release, an action for fraud will not lie in your favor, as this
would be contrary to the respect which you owe to your father, but you should
be granted an action in factum.
Given on the Idesof June, during the Consulate of the Caesars, 294.
6. The Same, and the Caesars, to Hymnoda.
Fraud must be proved by convincing evidence.1Given on the Kalendsof December,
during the Consulate of the Caesars, 294.
7. The Same, and the Caesars, to Sebastian.
If, when you are more than twenty-five years of age, you reject the estate of
your brother, you will not, under any circumstances, have the power to enter
upon it; but if you have been induced to do so by the fraudulent conduct of his
widow, who has been substituted for you, you can bring the action against her.
Given on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of the
Caesars.
8. The Emperor Constantine to Symmachus, Vicegerent.
We have thought it best that the term of a year, during which the action for
fraud can be instituted, should not begin to run from the day on which anyone
alleges that he has learned that fraud has been committed, nor within the
available time of the year, but rather from the date on which the fraud is said
to have been committed, within the term of two consecutive years, whether the
person who complains that he has been the victim of fraud was absent, or
present. Therefore, all persons are hereby notified that permission is not
given to
1 This is in accordance with the English and American rule that fraud must be
established by clear and positive proof, for while legal or constructive fraud
may exist, it is never presumed (Dolum non nisi perspicuis indiciis probari
convenit)except when the nature and circumstances of the case render such a
conclusion inevitable.
The Common Law doctrine relating to fraud has undoubtedly been borrowed from
the Roman jurists. It was long, however, before the evil effect of fraudulent
representations were recognized as actionable in England. "In the thirteenth
century our kings' court had in general no remedy for the man who to his damage
had trusted to the word of a liar."
"Our law, though willing to admit in vague phrase that no one should be
suffered to gain anything by fraud, (Et fraus et dolus nemini debent
patraeinari),was inclined to hold that a man has himself to thank if he is
misled by deceit; 'It is his folly.' " (Pollock and Maitland, History of
English Law, Vol. I, Pages 535/536.) --- ED.
begin the action after the term of two years has elapsed, or before the
complete term of two years has begun; but it should be terminated before the
expiration of the said two years.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of
Constantine, and the Caesar Licinius, 319.
TITLE XXII.
CONCERNING COMPLETE RESTITUTION GRANTED TO MINORS OF THE AGE OF TWENTY-FIVE
YEARS.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Plotiana.
It must be ascertained whether the complaint of inofficiousness has been openly
or tacitly renounced, and this does not show that you are entitled to this
privilege, although it is granted to a minor.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof July, during the Consulate of Maximus, Consul
for the second time, and Aelianus, 224.
2. The Emperor Gordian to Alexander.
If at the time when your sister was entitled to relief as a minor she enjoyed
the right to accept possession of the estate of your father, who died
intestate, she will, none the less, enjoy this privilege conferred by the
Edict, although she may have had five living children, provided she is still of
the age permitted her to obtain the benefit of restitution.
Given on the eighth of the Idesof August, during the Consulate of Pius and
Pontianus, 339.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to . Attianus.
If you, having a curator, and being under twenty-five years of age, should,
after having reached your majority, sell your property, this contract should
not be carried out; for a minor who has a curator does not differ from one for
whom a curator has been appointed by the Praetor, and has been forbidden to
dispose of his estate. Where, however, you made the contract without having a
curator, you will not, after proper cause has been shown, be forbidden to
petition for complete restitution, if the time prescribed by law has not yet
expired.
Given at Heraclea, on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof May, during the above-
mentioned Consulate, 293.
4. The Same, and the Caesars, to Isidor.
If you can prove that you were a minor under the age of twenty-five years when
you made the contract, and it is not established by your adversary that the
time prescribed for claiming restitution has elapsed, the Governor of the
province should grant you the relief of complete restitution.
Given at Heraclea, on the sixth of the Kalendsof May, during the above-
mentioned Consulate, 293.
5. The Same, and the Caesars, to Rufus.
Minors are entitled to complete restitution where they can show that advantage
has been taken of them, even if the fraud of their adversary is not proved; and
it is a positive rule of law that they can demand complete restitution with
reference to matters in which they think advantage has been taken of them, even
before they have reached their twenty-fifth year.
Given at Heraclea, on the fifth of the Kalendsof May, during the same
Consulate, 293.
6. The Same, and the Caesars, to Sententia.
If proceedings to obtain the benefit of complete restitution have been begun
within the age during which such relief is ordinarily granted, and it has not
been renounced by you, the death of the person of whom you made the demand
cannot cause you any damage.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
294.
7. The Same, and the Caesars, to Severa.
If you obtained your release from the guardianship of your uncle by false
representation of your age, his office of guardian, as well as his blood-
relationship indicating that he was not ignorant of it, you can, for this
reason, bring an action for complete restitution against his heirs, if the time
prescribed by law has not yet expired.
Given on the eleventh of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of the
Ca3sars, 274.
8. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Julianus, Proconsul of Africa.
It has been established by innumerable authorities that the interests of minors
must be consulted, whether they have been guilty of negligence, or have failed
to act through ignorance.
Given on the Nonesof May, during the Consulate of Constantius, 420.
9. The Emperor Zeno to Aelianus.
A minor is not considered to have been taken advantage of who avails himself of
the Common Law.
Given on the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of Basilius, 420.
TITLE XXIII.
CONCERNING COMPLETE RESTITUTION IN THE CASE OF A MINOR UNDER PARENTAL CONTROL.
1. The Emperor Gordian to the Soldier Tripho.
When a son under paternal control, who is a minor of twenty-five years of age,
becomes surety for a stranger, he is not prevented from petitioning for
complete restitution; and if he should become surety
for his father, he can still demand it, even though he may not succeed to his
estate at his death.
Given on the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Gordian, Consul for the
second time, and Pompeianus, 242.
2. The Same to the Soldier Gaudentius.
If your brother, who is under the control of your father, should borrow a sum
of money, and does not make the contract by order of his father or contrary to
the Decree of the Senate, he can, on account of the weakness of his age, demand
complete restitution, notwithstanding his obligation.
Given on the third of the Nonesof October, during the Consulate of Pius and
Pontianus.
TITLE XXIV. CONCERNING THE SURETIES OP MINORS.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Miro.
After you have obtained complete restitution through the privilege due to your
age, you will not be compelled to assume the risk of the eviction of the
purchaser, to whom you sold the land which formed part of your father's estate,
but those who became sureties for you cannot be released for this reason; and
therefore, if they paid the money, or have been ordered by the court to do so,
you can be sued in an action on mandate, provided you have not obtained the
benefit of restitution against the sureties also.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Severus
and Albinus, 195.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Curio.
If she who sold you her property obtains relief on the ground of her age, by
means of a decree rendered by the Governor, there is no doubt that the person
who became security for her will be obliged to carry out the contract; but if
the contract should appear to have been obtained through intentional fraud, it
is clearly a principle of law that, in granting relief, the interest of the
vendor, as well as that of her surety, should be taken into consideration.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Diocletian,
Consul for the second time, and Maximian, 287.
TITLE XXV.
WHERE A GUARDIAN OR A CURATOR INTERPOSES TO OBTAIN COMPLETE RESTITUTION.
1. Antoninus to Martiana and Others.
If you had arrived at puberty when you entered upon the estate of both your
parents, and you are still at that age, you have a right to obtain the benefit
of complete restitution on account of the obligation which you contracted with
reference to the estates of your par-
ents, if you can appear before the Governor of the province; but if you have
attained your majority, and have allowed the time to elapse during which you
could have obtained complete restitution, sue your curators in an action in
accordance to the rules of law, if you have not already proceeded against them.
Given on the second of the Nonesof April, during the Consulate of Laetus and
Caerealus, 216.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Martiana.
It has been decided that minors of twenty-five years of age can obtain the
benefit of complete restitution, if they have been overreached with reference
to matters which have been transacted, either judicially or extra judicially,
in the presence of their guardians or curators.
Given on the third of the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Aquilinus, 224.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Nicomedus.
It has already been decided that the benefit of complete restitution can be
accorded to minors in matters which their guardians or curators can be proved
to have improperly administered, although they can recover what they are
entitled to from their guardians or curators by means of a personal action.
Given on the fourth of the Nonesof May, during the Consulate of Maximus and
Aquilinus, 286.
4. The Same, and the Caesars, to Isidor.
If a creditor, not relying upon you personally but upon your curators, makes a
contract with them, and they stipulate with him, it is clear that no action
will lie in his favor against you.
Given at Heraclea on the fifth of the Kalendsof May, during the above-mentioned
Consulate, 291.
5. The Same, and the Caesars, to Valentinus.
It has been decided that even where guardians or curators have sold property,
or have made contracts of some other description, the minors can either have
their own property restored, or obtain damages from their guardians or
curators, and that their rights shall not be prejudiced, no matter which method
they may select.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof December, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
164.
TITLE XXVI.
WHERE COMPLETE RESTITUTION OF PROPERTY OWNED IN COMMON IS DEMANDED.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Aphobius and
Others.
Even though your sister may have been more than twenty-five years of age she
can, under no circumstances, deprive you of any of
your rights, where you did not give her authority to do so, or subsequently
ratify the transaction. If, however, you, knowing what she has done, should,
after having reached the age of twenty-five years, give your consent to it,
although she, if still a minor, can apply for the relief of restitution, so far
as her own interest in the property is concerned, but her age will not be of
any advantage to you for the purpose of participation in the benefit of the
Perpetual Edict.
Given on the third of the Idesof August, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
264.
TITLE XXVII.
WHERE RESTITUTION IS DEMANDED IN A CASE IN WHICH A DECISION HAS BEEN RENDERED.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Viliiis.
Where you, in an action on guardianship, have obtained less than you were
entitled to, you can bring suit for the remainder, and the privilege due to
your age will be allowed, if you were a minor at the time when judgment was
rendered; but if this was done after you had attained your majority, you cannot
again make use of the same action to recover the same property.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of
Pompeianus and Pelignus.
2. The Emperor Gordian to Serena.
As your father alleges that you are still under his control, and that the
emancipation made by him is not valid, if the Proconsul, who has jurisdiction
of the case, should decide that you are still subject to his authority, and
you, in opposition to this decision, petition for complete restitution, the
Governor of the province, in taking cognizance of the case, shall render
judgment in conformity with the laws.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of Pius
and Pontianus.
3. The Emperor Philip to Aeliana.
You can, by no means, obtain the benefit of complete restitution from the
Praetor or the illustrious Governor of the province, in opposition to the
decision of him who, at that time, represented the Emperor; for the Emperor
alone can grant restitution against the decision of anyone who acted as his
representative.
Given on the eighteenth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of
Philip and Titian, 246.
4. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Urbinius and Others.
As you allege that you are minors, and have not been defended, the Governor of
the province, according to his authority, shall see that your interests are not
prejudiced; but if judgment has been ren-
dered against you on any point, after a suitable defence has been made by your
guardians or curators, understand that it will be necessary for you to claim
the benefit of complete restitution; and the same rule will apply if the case
has been defended by your legally appointed attorney.
Given on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Maximus
and Aquilinus.
5. The Same, and the Caesars, to Martian.
It is established that minors or adults,1 can ask for restitution in matters in
which they are interested, where judgment has been rendered by the Governor
against their guardians and curators, just as if it had been rendered against
them personally.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof November, during the abovementioned
Consulate, 293.
TITLE XXVIII. CONCERNING RESTITUTION ON ACCOUNT OF A SALE.
1. The Emperor Alexander to the Soldier Florentius.
If you, a minor of twenty-five years of age, have given security to the
purchaser of land, which you sold to him, that you will not raise any
controversy with reference to the same, you ought not to expect, after having
taken an oath for the purpose of confirming the transaction, that I would
permit you to be guilty of perfidy or perjury.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof September ....
New Constitution of Frederick.
Oaths voluntarily made by persons who have arrived at puberty, to the effect
that they will not repudiate contracts made with reference to their property,
must be kept inviolate, but We order that those which have been extorted
through well-grounded apprehension, even from persons who are of age, and
especially where they swear that they will make no complaint of offences
committed against them, shall be of no effect.
2. The Emperors Constantine, Constantius, and Constans to the People.
There is no doubt that the law provides for complete restitution in favor of
minors where fictitious sales have been made, and fraudulent transactions
entered into by their guardians or curators.
Given on the Idesof August, during the Consulate of Constantius, Consul for the
first time, and Constans, 289.
1 An adult, at Civil Law, was a male child who had reached the age of fourteen
years, or a female who had reached the age of twelve; in other words, minors
who had passed the age of puberty. --- ED.
TITLE XXIX.
WHERE RESTITUTION IS DEMANDED ON ACCOUNT OF THE SALE OF PLEDGES.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Sabina and Others.
It has already been decided that relief can also be given to minors against the
sale of pledges made by creditors, but only provided they have sustained great
injury. Therefore, if you can prove that you have suffered serious loss from
the sale of lands which have been hypothecated, and especially if you assert
that you are still minors, the benefit of restitution will be accorded you.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors, 293.
2. The Same, and the Caesars, to Severa and Clementina.
A creditor of your father having sold certain property of the latter which had
been pledged to him, you have no right to ask for the sale to be rescinded, and
restitution made on account of your age; and the rule is the same if you had
succeeded a stranger. If, however, the creditor did not act in good faith,
bring suit against him in the first place, or against your guardians and
curators, who permitted this sale to be effected.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof May, under the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.
TITLE XXX.
WHERE RESTITUTION IS DEMANDED ON ACCOUNT OF A DONATION.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Theodora.
If any property was given you by your husband, who, at the time of your
betrothal, and before the celebration of your marriage, was under the age of
twenty-five years, and your curator was present, the donation cannot be revoked
under the pretext of want of age.
Given on the third of the Nonesof November, during the Consulate of Diocletian
and Aristobulus, 285.
2. The Same, and the Caesars, to Meda.
If your father, after having emancipated you, made a donation to your brother
and yourself, and afterwards transferred your brother's share to another, but
did not deprive you of anything, and your brother did not consent to the
donation by his father of a portion of the rustic estate, he cannot lose his
ownership of it on account of the authority of the Decree of the Senate; nor in
this case is the relief of complete restitution necessary.
With reference to any other property, however, which cannot be alienated
without a decree, if, after it had been given to him, he con-
sented, while still a minor, to its donation by his father, he can invoke the
benefit of restitution; provided the prescribed time for doing so has not
expired.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors, 293.
TITLE XXXI.
WHERE RESTITUTION IS DEMANDED ON ACCOUNT OF A GRANT OF FREEDOM.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Hamnia.
Where, after a decree has been rendered by the illustrious Praetor, by which he
decided that freedom was due under the terms of the trust, Secundus, whom you
allege has not complied with the condition upon which his liberation was
dependent, is not manumitted, your age as a minor will authorize a renewal of
judicial proceedings. If, however, you have granted him freedom, even though he
may not have been entitled to it, understand that you cannot revoke it, but
your curators will be required, in an action on voluntary agency, to indemnify
you for any damage which you may have sustained on this account.
Given on the second of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Lateranus
and Rufinus, 198.
2. The Emperor Gordian to Solanoa.
If (as you allege), you, a minor of twenty years of age, have manumitted your
slave, although you may have been fraudulently persuaded to do so, still, the
imposition of the rod by which freedom is lawfully bestowed cannot be rescinded
under the pretext of defect of age; the manumitted slave, however, must
indemnify you, and this should be provided for by the magistrate having
jurisdiction of the case to the extent that the law permits.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Gordian, Consul
for the second time, and Pompeianus, 242.
3. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to Marona and Sabillina.
You ask that the slaves whom you have manumitted again be reduced to servitude,
alleging that you were at the time minors under the age of twenty, and that the
matter was not considered in council. You cannot obtain complete restitution,
but you can recover the property in accordance with law. If liberty was granted
on good grounds, complete restitution cannot be allowed to annul the grant; if,
however, you have been injured by the transaction through the negligence of
fraud of your freedman, or his curator, the Governor of the province shall see
that you are indemnified by whoever is responsible for it; and he must not
hesitate to inflict a more serious penalty upon the freedman if he should be
convicted of having openly and fraudulently committed a crime deserving of
punishment.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of
Secularis, Consul for the second time, and Donatus, 261.
4. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Tatian.
It cannot be doubted that where a decision has been rendered in favor of
freedom, in an action in which it is in question, it cannot be rescinded on the
ground of the privilege of minority without an appeal being taken.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof January, during the Consulate of the same
Emperors; the first, Consul for the fifth time, and the second, Consul for the
fourth time, 290.
TITLE XXXII.
WHERE A MINOR APPLIES FOR COMPLETE RESTITUTION AGAINST A COMPROMISE OR A
DIVISION OF PROPERTY.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Antony.
Where a female minor has obtained complete restitution, and a compromise or a
division of property has been rescinded, it has been decided that you can bring
the same action against her to which you were entitled in the first place.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors, 203.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Hymnoda.
If the relief of complete restitution on the ground of want of age is demanded
in the name of minors against a compromise, relief will also be granted to
anyone instituting judicial proceedings either by a reply to an exception based
on an agreement; or, if it should be established that the former obligation was
extinguished, your interests will be consulted by the revival of the action in
your favor.
Given on the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the above-mentioned
Emperors, 293.
TITLE XXXIII.
WHERE RESTITUTION IS DEMANDED ON ACCOUNT OF PAYMENT MADE BY THE GUARDIAN OF A
MINOR OR BY
HIMSELF.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Setorica.
Guardians who are indebted on account of their administration, and who pay what
they owe to curators, are released, just as other debtors are; but the benefit
of complete restitution against this pay-
ment is permitted by the Perpetual Edict, before the prescribed time has
elapsed; and it can be determined by investigation of the case whether or not
it should be granted.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof February, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
294.
2. The Same, and the Caesars, to Laurina.
It is reasonable that the right of recovery of a legacy which was not due
should be granted to a minor, even though it may have been paid by him through
an error of law; provided the time during which the relief of restitution can
be granted has not expired.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of the
above-named Emperors, 294.
TITLE XXXIV. WHERE RESTITUTION IS DEMANDED AGAINST A DOWRY.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Valens.
As you say that your sister was swindled when she gave all her property as her
dowry, the Governor of the province, in the presence of the adverse party,
shall ascertain whether your allegation is true, and whether the estate of your
sister or praetorian possession of her property belongs to you, if the time has
not yet elapsed within which you, as the representative of the deceased, are
permitted by the law to demand complete restitution.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof July, during the Consulate of Maximus and
Paternus, 234.
TITLE XXXV.
WHERE A MINOR APPLIES FOR RESTITUTION ON ACCOUNT OP A CRIME COMMITTED BY HIM.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Longinus.
In criminal cases, minors are not entitled to relief under the pretext of want
of age, for weakness of mind does not excuse the acts of evilly disposed
persons. If, however, the crime does not proceed from the mind, but from some
other source, the offender will not be liable to punishment, even where the
penalty involves the payment of a sum of money; hence, in cases of this kind,
minors are entitled to the benefit of complete restitution.
Given on the Idesof October, during the Consulate of Severus, Consul for the
second time, and Victorinus, 201.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Procula.
Although it is established that, in the case of crimes, no one is excusable on
account of his age, it is, however, proper that a mother
should not be refused succession to the estate of her children, when she was
responsible for not having had a guardian appointed for them, through an error
pardonable on account of her age, as this rule only applies to mothers who have
attained their majority.
Given on the fifth of the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
294.
TITLE XXXVI.
WHERE A MINOR DEMANDS RESTITUTION BY WAY OF
RELIEF AGAINST USUCAPTION.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Isidor.
The benefit of restitution should be granted in favor of minors against those
who hold their property, when they acquire ownership of the same by usucaption.
Given on the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of the Caesars, 294.
TITLE XXXVII.
WHERE A MINOR DEMANDS RESTITUTION BY WAY OF RELIEF AGAINST THE TREASURY.
1. The Emperor Severus and Antoninus to Longinus.
If Probus, while a minor, was overreached by Rufinus, Our steward, and
contracted for the sale of property hastily and without proper consideration
for a price which was far too low, Our Treasury must obey the authority of
public law, and make complete restitution.
Given during the Consulate of Severus, Consul for the second time, and
Victorinus, 227.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Antiochus and Others.
If you and your brothers desire to obtain complete restitution against private
individuals, cognizance of the case should be taken by the Governor of the
province, who, after proper examination, must decide whether the relief which
you request shall be granted you. If, however, you have demanded restitution
against the Treasury, understand that you must appear before My representative,
sitting with the Governor in the presence of the Advocate of the Treasury.
Given on the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Alexander, Consul for
the second time, and Marcellus, 227.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Laurentius.
The exemption of the property of minors granted by the Edict of Our Father the
Divine Marcus does not apply to what you demand, as the sale of the property of
your minor father, or the alienation of your own property on account of a debt,
does not admit of the pre-
scription of five years; but, as you assert that your land was sold with your
slaves at a very low price, through the collusion or fraud of Our Fiscal Agent,
who was in office at that time, if Our present Fiscal Agent finds that your
allegations should be believed, and that the formalities requisite in a public
sale were complied with, and you pay the Treasury what is due to it, he must
rescind the sale, and order the land to be restored to you.
Given on the Idesof February, during the Consulate of the Caesars, 294.
TITLE XXXVIII.
WHERE A MINOR DEMANDS RESTITUTION BY WAY OF RELIEF AGAINST A CREDITOR.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Prunicus.
As you acknowledge that you made a contract with Zenodora, a minor under the
age of twenty-five years, and have not been able to prove before the
illustrious Praetor that she was pecuniarily benefited by the said contract, you
understand that it is but reasonable that she would obtain complete
restitution.
Given on the sixth of the Nonesof August, during the Consulate of Largus and
Messalinus, 148.
2. The Emperor Gordian to Caianus.
If (as you allege) you were a minor when you borrowed money at interest, and
that it has not been employed for your benefit, you can formally assert the
right of complete restitution against the note by means of which you incurred
the obligation.
Given on the third of the Nonesof February, during the second Consulate of
Gordian, 242.
TITLE XXXIX. WHERE A MINOR REJECTS AN ESTATE.
1. The Emperors Sevens and Antoninus to Florentius and Others.
If you have not interfered in the affairs of the estate of your father, it will
not be necessary for you to produce witnesses to prove that you have not
accepted it, as, in this instance, the truth of the matter does not require the
support of verbal testimony. If, however, you have acted as heir, or if you
have taken possession of the property, you should receive the benefit of
complete restitution, on account of your age, for which reason relief is
ordinarily granted.
Given on the sixth of the Nonesof May, during the Consulate of Saturninus and
Gallus, 199.
Extract from Novel 119, Chapter VI. Latin Text.
If all the creditors are present when restitution is demanded, they shall be
summoned by the judge to appear when the minor rejects
the estate, or if all or only some of them are absent, they shall be formally
summoned by the judge. If they should not appear within three months, the minor
can reject the estate without any risk, and the judge shall determine where and
how the property belonging to it shall be cared for, and an inventory shall be
made of the same.
2. The Emperor Gordian to Herodota.
If your grandparents made you their testamentary heir, and you have not entered
upon their estates, after having rejected your paternal succession, you have
the right to obtain the aid of complete restitution of the estates of your
grandparents (as you say that you are still of the proper age to do so), in
spite of the fact that you did not previously accept them.
Given on the third of the Nonesof February, during the Consulate of Gordian,
Consul for the second time, and Pompeianus, 242.
TITLE XL.
WHERE A MINOR DEMANDS RESTITUTION FOR THE PURPOSE OF OBTAINING AN ESTATE WHICH
HE HAS REJECTED, OR THE POSSESSION OF PROPERTY OR ANYTHING
ELSE.
1. The Emperor Gordian to Prota.
It has already been decided that minors of twenty-five years of age can demand
the benefit of complete restitution, not only with reference to their own
property which they have lost, but also where they did not accept an estate
which was left to them.
Given on the Idesof October, during the Consulate of Pius and Pontianus, 239.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Sarapiadus.
It has already been decided that minors should be admitted to demand the
benefit of complete restitution where praetorian possession of the estates of
their parents has been refused by them; but those who have been restored by a
decree must deliver to their brothers the property which they had at the time
of their father's death.
Given on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.
TITLE XLI.
IN WHAT INSTANCES COMPLETE RESTITUTION IS NOT
NECESSARY.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Mutatus.
It is stated in innumerable Rescripts of My ancestors, as well as in My own,
that, where minors of twenty-five years of age have not
avenged the death of their father, this cannot be pleaded against them,
especially where they are not defended by guardians and curators.
Given on the Idesof May, during the Consulate of Alexander, Consul for the
third time, and Dio, 230.
2. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to Theodore.
We have previously plainly shown that the period of youth is not included in
the term of five years, on account of the expiration of which prescription is
ordinarily pleaded by children, who institute proceedings with reference to an
inofficious will too late. Therefore, complete restitution is not necessary
after a person has reached his majority, because the revival of an action which
has been extinguished is not granted to him, but the case itself remains
unimpaired.
Given on the second of the Idesof August, during the Consulate of Tuscus and
Bassus, 260.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Decimus.
It is an accepted rule of law that, in the case of minors, a person is
considered to be in default from the very moment when he delays payment of the
price of property, and this rule applies to all transactions which admit of
default, that is to say, to bona fidecontracts, trusts, and legacies.
4. The Same, and the Caesars, to Stratonica.
If your guardian, who has not given security for his administration, should be
sued, a decision rendered against him cannot injure your right, nor will any
business which he has transacted be valid; and therefore you will in vain
petition for complete restitution, since whatever he has done is absolutely
void in law, because, under the circumstances, he can not maintain the
character of a legal guardian.
Given at Nicomedia, on the eighteenth of the Kalendsof November, during the
Consulate of the Caesars, 294.
5. The Emperor Justinian to John, Praetorian Prefect.
In order to show indulgence to the non-age of minors, We decree that an
exception on the ground that money was not paid shall not run against them from
the beginning, lest, while We are expecting complete restitution, some obstacle
may arise on account of which a minor cannot avail himself of a privilege of
this kind, or his property may be threatened with loss; but it is more humane
to extend the interpretation of this law to all those cases in which the
ancient laws are applicable, and which permit temporary prescriptions to run
against minors, and come to their relief by means of complete restitution, so
that they may not run against them by operation of law; for it is better for
their rights to remain intact than for them to seek a remedy after these have
been endangered; but of course prescrip-
tions of thirty or forty years standing will remain in their present condition.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof November, after the Consulate of
Lampadius and Orestes, 531.
TITLE XLII.
WHO CANNOT OBTAIN COMPLETE RESTITUTION, AND AGAINST WHOM IT CANNOT BE OBTAINED.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Cononidus.
Where complete restitution is demanded, it is necessary for the judge having
jurisdiction to ascertain whether he who alleges that he is a minor and has
been injured has shown himself to be the diligent head of a household, and
acted so wisely in his public conduct that it is not probable that advantage
would have been taken of his age. If, however, after proper investigation, he
is shown to have been deceived, he should not, on this account alone, and by
the mere fact of the prescription, be excluded from the relief usually granted;
for instance, where he has been created a decurion while still a minor, on
account of the urgent necessities of his country; or where he has married and
had children for the purpose of educating them.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Lupus and
Maximus, 253.
2. The Emperor Justinian to John, Praetorian Prefect.
It was doubted by the ancient authorities whether children could sue their
parents, or freedmen their patrons, as, by doing so, they would not conduct
themselves properly towards them, and some jurists held that complete
restitution could not be obtained against persons of this kind, as the force of
natural affection, or the respect due to a patron is opposed to such insolence,
unless there was some extraordinary cause for it, or the action was brought
against a person who was infamous.
Others held that any distinction of persons or causes should be rejected under
such circumstances, but they thought that restitution should only be granted
where the minor stated that he had been deceived on account of his
inexperience, and not been overreached by the fraudulent act of his father or
his patron; but, in order that the honor due to all parents as well as to
patrons and patronesses may remain unimpaired, We order that restitution shall
by no means be granted against parents of either sex, or against a patron or a
patroness; for the respect due to such persons excludes all restitution, as
there is no doubt that care should be taken that nothing injurious to their
reputations may take place.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof September, after the Consulate of
Lampadius and Orestes, 531.
TITLE XLIII. WHERE A MINOR ALLEGES THAT HE IS OF AGE.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Maximiana.
If you are under twenty-five years of age, and can prove that you have been
deceived by the records of your birth, from which it appears that you were over
that age, you can, after having attained your majority and within the time
prescribed by law, demand complete restitution of everything which has been
done contrary to your rights while you were a minor, of the magistrate having
jurisdiction of the case.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Maximus
and Paternus, 234.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Vitalianus.
If a person who alleges that he is at present a minor should deceive you by
falsely stating that he has attained his majority, he should not obtain
complete restitution, as the laws only afford relief to those who are mistaken
with reference to what has been legally established, and not to minors who are
guilty of fraud.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Diocletian and Maximian, 293.
3. The Same, and the Caesars, to Theodora.
If, while a minor, you attempted to prove that you had attained your majority
for the purpose of deceiving another, as malice supplies the defect of age, it
has been decided not only by the Imperial Constitutions, but also by the
authority of the Rescripts, that the benefit of restitution should be denied
you. When, however, this has been accomplished by the injustice or fraud of
your adversary, the privilege of restitution, which is usually granted to
minors after proper investigation, will continue to exist. Therefore, when
applied to, the Governor of the province, having examined the evidence of age,
shall provide for your complete restitution, if he finds that you have not been
guilty of fraud, and you prove that you were a minor at the time. But if you
have stated in some document, under oath, that you were of age, you must be
aware that you will be excluded from the benefit of complete restitution,
unless you can openly and clearly show that you were a minor by the production
of documents, and not by the statements of witnesses; but if you have actually
taken an oath of this kind, it is evident that, according to law, you will not
be entitled to any relief.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.
4. The Same, and the Caesars, to Labius.
As you allege that a mistake in proving the number of years was made before the
Governor, and as it is admitted that relief can be
granted to minors under paternal control, in cases of this kind, the Governor
of the province must examine the matters set forth in your petition, and if he
finds, by the evidence which you offer, that in computing your age, your
opinion was incorrect, when you thought that you had reached your majority, he
shall decide in your case whatever is in accordance with truth.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof December, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
294.
TITLE XLIV.
WHEN COMPLETE RESTITUTION IS DEMANDED MORE THAN ONCE.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Romanus and Others.
If you should desire complete restitution after a decision of the Proconsul has
been rendered against you, and you do not obtain it, you will, in vain, ask
that the proceedings having reference to complete restitution be revived, for
you ought to have appealed if the decision displeased you, but if you are still
of an age to be entitled to relief, We restore to you the right of appeal.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Chilo and
Libo, 205.
2. The Emperor Alexander to the Soldier Justus.
Although the curators of a female minor may have been defeated when they made a
demand in her behalf for complete restitution, still, as you allege that new
means of defence are now available in the case, the curators of your wife
should appear before the judge, and request to be permitted to present again
the reasons for complete restitution.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Alexander,
Consul for the second time, and Marcellus, 227.
3. The Emperor Philip to Anitia.
It has frequently been stated in Rescripts that the benefit of complete
restitution cannot legally be demanded more than once in one and the same case
(unless new defences are offered).
Given on the second of the Kalendsof June, during the Consulate of Peregrinus
and Aemilianus, 247.
TITLE XLV.
CONCERNING THOSE WHO OBTAIN A RELEASE FROM THE DISABILITY OP NON-AGE.
1. The Emperor Aurelian to Agathocles.
It is perfectly clear that those who, through the indulgence of the Emperor,
have obtained a release from the incapacity of age, even if they do not seem to
have administered their property in a proper
manner, cannot obtain the benefit of complete restitution, lest those who
contract with them may appear to have been deceived by the Imperial authority.
Given on the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Aurelian and Capitolinus,
275.
2. The Emperor Constantine to Verinus, Praetorian Prefect.
All young persons who are of good morals and desire to administer the estates
of their fathers or grandfathers, which have been left to them, and who on this
account, have need of the aid of the Emperor, are only entitled to a release
from the incapacity of age when they have completed their twentieth year, but
they cannot obtain this favor for themselves from the Emperor, unless they
establish their age by written instruments, and prove the integrity and
rectitude of their lives by the evidence of witnesses called to show what their
morals are.
(1) We order that women, also, whom the correctness of their morals and the
activity of their minds recommend, can obtain a release from the incapacity of
age after they have passed their eighteenth year; but, on account of the
modesty and reserve of the female sex, We do not compel them to be present in
public assemblies; still, having obtained this release from legal incapacity,
We permit them to prove their age by five witnesses, or by documents presented
by an attorney, in order that they may have the same rights in the transaction
of all business, as We have directed that men shall have; but they cannot
alienate their lands without a decree.
(2) The illustrious senators, however, who reside in this Imperial City, must
produce testimony with reference to their morals and honesty before your
tribunal; other persons shall appear before the Praetor, and all those in the
provinces are required to present their evidence to the Governors.
(3) Those who, through the indulgence of the Emperor, have obtained a release
from incapacity of age, without having conformed to the above-mentioned
formalities, are notified that such a release is of no force or effect.
Given at Rome, on the third of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of
Crispus and the Caesar Constantine, both Consuls for the second time, 321.
3. The Emperor Justinian to Menna, Praetorian Prefect.
We order that those who already have obtained, or may hereafter obtain a
release from the incapacity of age through the indulgence of the Emperor, shall
not make any alienation or hypothecation of their real property without a
decree, in all cases where the alienation or hypothecation of such property by
those who have not obtained a release from the disability of age is necessary;
as the condition of all minors under such circumstances is similar, whether
they have obtained such indulgence or not.
Given on the eighth of the Idesof April, under the Consulate of Decius, 529.
4. The Same to the Senate.
When anyone desires something to be given or done, and mentions lawful age, or
states absolutely that he has attained his majority, We decree that such age be
understood to be that of twenty-five years, and not what is granted by the
favor of the Emperor. We desire this rule to be applicable in cases of
substitution or restitution, as well as to all other matters, unless it should
expressly be stated that reference to a release from the disability of age is
intended.
Given on the ninth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Lampadius
and Orestes, 530.
TITLE XLVI.
WHERE A MINOR RATIFIES HIS ACT AFTER HAVING ATTAINED HIS MAJORITY.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Eutychidnus.
Where partition has taken place, without any fraud, between minors under
twenty-five years of age, either in writing or without it, and the parties,
after arriving at lawful age, confirm the transaction, it is held to be valid.1
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof May, under the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors, 293.
2. The Same Emperors and Caesars to Sortirus.
Those who, after they have reached their twenty-fifth year, ratify transactions
made during their minority, will, in vain, demand that they be rescinded.
Given on the Idesof February, during the Consulate of the Caesars, 294.
TITLE XLVII.
WHERE, AND BEFORE WHAT JUDGE APPLICATION FOR COMPLETE RESTITUTION SHOULD BE
MADE.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Severus.
The decision of the Governor cannot be rescinded where a case involving
complete restitution has been decided by My deputy, for the Emperor, alone, can
grant complete restitution against the decision of his representative.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of Laetus and
Cerealis, 216.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Acquilina.
As you state that you have delivered the property which you were compelled to
give by the terms of a compromise, the result will be
1 The American rule with reference to the avoidance or ratification of
contracts by minors, after attaining their majority, is based upon this
principle. --- ED.
that if you desire to institute proceedings to recover said property, either by
means of complete restitution, or in any other way, you must appear before the
Governor of the province in which the parties against whom you bring the action
have their domicile.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof September, after the third Consulate of
Lampadius and Orestes, 531.
3. The Emperor Justinian to John, Praetorian Prefect.
As we know that doubts have arisen, with reference to cases where complete
restitution is demanded, as to whether they should be heard by a magistrate of
general jurisdiction, or by judges specially appointed, when minors under the
age of twenty-five years or persons who have attained their majority make the
demand in accordance with the rules laid down by the ancient laws, or by Our
own Constitutions, We order that suits of this kind should not only be brought
before judges who have general jurisdiction, but also before those whom Our
August Majesty has appointed, or the administrators of Our government, both in
this Imperial City, and in the provinces, so that he who appointed the judge
may be considered as having jurisdiction of the matter, and grant complete
restitution, as well as examine the reasons for it, and, in this way, the
proceedings will not give rise to any difficulty.
In order, however, that no one may venture to give too broad a construction to
Our Constitution, and think that it extends to judges appointed for the purpose
of compromise, or to arbiters selected by common consent, or to persons
designated by judges who themselves have no jurisdiction but merely the power
to decide, We desire that, generally speaking, only those judges shall dispose
of such cases who have been appointed for a certain administration to which
jurisdiction has been added, or where others have been appointed by them; and
this rule is especially applicable when they have been delegated by Our Majesty
to determine such controversies. But, that no doubt whatever may remain, We
think that it should be provided that those judges whom we have enumerated
above shall be permitted to decide with reference to complete restitution,
where this right was specially conferred upon them (a course of procedure not
unknown to the ancients); or where they have been appointed without
limitations; or where, in other matters, some question relating to restitution
arises.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof September, after the Consulate of Lampadius
and Orestes, 531.



TITLE XLVIII.
CONCERNING REFLECTIONS MADE IN A JUDGMENT FOR COMPLETE RESTITUTION.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Tatian.
If the party who obtains complete restitution should not suffer any loss from
the proceeding, so also he should obtain no profit, and
hence he must deliver up anything which may come into his hands either from a
purchase, a sale, or any other contract. If, however, a minor under the age of
twenty-five years should be delegated, the right of action should be restored
in favor of the creditor against the original debtor. Where a minor enters upon
an estate, and obtains restitution, he must immediately surrender whatever he
obtained from the estate, and if he has been guilty of fraud, he should be held
responsible.



TITLE XLIX.
PROCEEDINGS TO OBTAIN COMPLETE RESTITUTION CAN ALSO BE INSTITUTED BY AN
ATTORNEY.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Licinius.
It is established that, if the right exists, an action for complete restitution
can also be brought by an attorney.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of
Pompeianus and Pelignus, 232.


TITLE L.
No NEW PROCEEDING TAKES PLACE WHEN A DEMAND FOR COMPLETE RESTITUTION IS MADE.
1. The Emperor Gordian to the Soldier Secundinus.
It is a plain rule of law that where complete restitution is demanded,
everything remains in the same condition until the case is terminated, and he
who has charge of such matters must see that this is done.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Gordian and
Aviola, 240.
TITLE LI.
CONCERNING THE RESTITUTION OF SOLDIERS AND OF PERSONS WHO ARE ABSENT ON
BUSINESS FOR THE STATE.
1. The Emperor Severus and Antoninus to Chilo.
If Valerian, Centurion of the Twelfth Cohort of the Alps, died before obtaining
possession of the property in question, his heir, as the representative of the
deceased, can legally demand the benefit of complete restitution within the
available year (if Valerian died while in the army), after the time has elapsed
during which the possession of the estate was left to him.
Given on the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of Lateranus and Rufinus,
198.
2. The Emperor Alexander to the Centurion Petronius.If persons who are absent
on public business have suffered any loss or if anyone should be released from
an action which could have
been brought against him by the said absent parties, complete restitution can
be granted them, within the available year, without their being barred by
prescription.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of
Alexander, Consul for the second time, and Marcellus, 227.
3. The Same to the Soldier Flavius Aristodemus.
A soldier, during a year after he has ceased to be absent on business for the
State, is permitted to claim any of his property which has been taken
possession of by someone during his absence, without the intermediate time
being included in the prescription; but after the said term has elapsed, he
cannot interfere with the rights of the possessor.
Given on the Nonesof January, during the Consulate of Maximus, Consul for the
second time, and Aelianus, 224.
4. The Emperor Gordian to Mastrianus.
You should not be ignorant of the fact that the property of persons who are
absent in the service of the State, without fraudulent intent, can only be
taken possession of where they are not defended in accordance with the judgment
of a good citizen, and that the sale should be postponed until they have ceased
to be absent on public business.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of Gordian
and Aviola, 240.
5. The Same to the Soldier Secundinus.
It is clear that the prescription of five years after a sale has been made by
the Treasury cannot prejudice the rights of persons who are absent on business
for the State, nor of others who have attained their majority and are entitled
to complete restitution.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof May, during the Consulate of Sabinus and
Venustus, 241.
6. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to the Centurion Germanus.
If, while you were engaged in the performance of your military duties, the
heirs of your creditor sold the property which had been encumbered to their
ancestors, you can, after having appeared before the Governor of the province,
obtain complete restitution; and, the sale having been rescinded, you can
recover your property if you offer to pay the amount of the indebtedness or the
purchase-money, if it was less than the claim.
Given on the fourth of the Nonesof April, during the Consulate of Valerian and
Gallienus, 225.
7. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximum, and the Caesars, to Marina.
It is not proper for sons, under the pretext of military service, to demand
that affairs transacted by their father should be rescinded
as void, especially as you do not allege that your father, during his lifetime,
made any complaint with reference to the contract in question.
Given on the Nonesof February, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.
8. The Emperor Justinian to Menna, Praetorian Prefect.
We order that those alone who are engaged in military expeditions shall be
entitled to take advantage of the time which elapsed during such expeditions,
not only in not being subject to the operation of exceptions, but also in order
to demand complete restitution. Those who are absent elsewhere, or are at home,
can, by no means, enjoy the benefit of claiming the above-mentioned privileges
during the time occupied by said expeditions.
Given at Constantinople, on the sixth of the Idesof April, during the Consulate
of Decius, 529.
TITLE LII.
CONCERNING THE WIVES OP SOLDIERS AND OP THOSE WHO ARE ABSENT ON BUSINESS FOR
THE STATE.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Secundina.
It is well known that it is customary, as in the case of soldiers, to grant
relief to women who are absent with their husbands on business for the State,
so far as temporary actions, which are extinguished by reason of absence, are
concerned.
Given on the third of the Nonesof December, during the Consulate of Alexander,
Consul for the second time, and Marcellus, 227.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Quintilian.
Prescription based upon a long lapse of time does not run against a woman who
has been for a considerable period with her husband, who was serving in the
army, but, for the reason that schemes fraudulently and shrewdly devised, on
account of prolonged absence of this kind, may not prejudice anyone, if such a
woman can show that a house which belonged to her was sold during her absence,
We order that the price which was actually paid for the same be refunded, and
that the woman receive the house.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the same
Emperors, 293.
TITLE LIII.
CONCERNING THE TIME DURING WHICH MINORS AND OTHER PERSONS, AS WELL AS THEIR
HEIRS, WHO HAVE A RIGHT TO COMPLETE RESTITUTION, CAN OBTAIN IT.
1. The Emperor Gordian to the Soldier Pudens.As you are a minor under the age
of twenty-five years, you can demand the benefit of complete restitution with
reference to those
matters in which you have sustained injury, for the entire time occupied by the
military expedition; for the period during which restitution can be demanded
after a minor has become of age, in this case should, in accordance with law,
be computed from the day of his discharge.
Given on the third of the Nonesof October, during the Consulate of Pius and
Pontianus, 239.
2. The Same to the Soldier Secundinus.
If your father died before he was of legal age, or even afterwards but before
the time prescribed by law had elapsed, and you became his heir, and before
having reached the age of twenty-five years, or even afterwards, but before the
time had expired during which your deceased father could have demanded
restitution, you enlisted in the army, the Governor of the province, after
proper investigation, shall come to your relief by granting you complete
restitution as the representative of the deceased.
Given on the eleventh of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of Pius
and Pontianus, 239.
3. The Same to the Soldier Mutianus.
If, during the years in which complete restitution could have been granted, you
were appointed to a command in the army, or enlisted and served your term as a
soldier, the benefit of restitution will continue by usucaption, even though it
may have been perfected before you entered the service, for it is not permitted
that you should be oppressed by the loss of your property.
Given on the ninth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of Pius and
Pontianus, 239.
4. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Dionysius.
If you demand the estates of your brothers, you can proceed against the person
of whom you complain, being aware that if your brothers, who were minors under
the age of twenty-five years, died while in the army, time would not run
against them to prevent them from obtaining complete restitution, but they
would transmit all their rights to their successor.
Given at Philippopolis, on the eighth of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of the Caesars, 294.
5. The Emperor Constantine to Bassus, Praetorian Prefect.
Whatever has been provided by the laws with reference to the time during which
complete restitution can be demanded must be complied with. If anyone should
obtain from Us the benefit of release from the incapacity of age, it is proper
that the time should run from the day when Our Indulgence notified a competent
judge of the fact, and the administration of his own property was granted to
the party in question, so that he can proceed to obtain complete restitution,
and have his case terminated within the time prescribed by law.
The aid of complete restitution should, however, never be refused to minors
under the age of twenty-five years, so far as any business which they
transacted before they were released from the disability of age is concerned.
(1) When one minor succeeds to the rights of another, he is not prevented from
demanding complete restitution during the time prescribed by law, after he has
reached his twenty-fifth year.
(2) When a minor succeeds to the rights of one who has attained his majority,
he is only entitled to as much time for the purpose of demanding complete
restitution as the deceased whose heir, or the possessor of whose estate he is
proved to be, could have claimed.
(3) When a person, who is of age, obtains the estate of a minor, whether he
succeeds to it ab intestato,or under a will, the time when he can demand
restitution is reckoned from the day when he entered upon the estate. If,
however, he should acquire possession of the property under the praetorian law,
the time for examining and deciding with reference to complete restitution will
run from the date when he obtained possession of the property, without any
deduction whatever.
Given at Rome, on the Nonesof October, during the Consulate of Constantine and
Licinius-Caesar, both Consuls for the second time, 312.
Extract from Novel 100, Chapter II. Latin Text.
Where a minor, under the age of twenty-five years, does not make complaint as
soon as the dowry provided for is not paid, he can, nevertheless, be restored,
provided the twelfth year from the time of the marriage has not elapsed. If,
however, he should die within the prescribed time, a year shall be granted to
his heir. But if the heir of the deceased, whether he was of age or a minor, is
himself a minor, he shall enjoy the privilege of a term of five years, without
any reference to how old he may be.
6. The Same to Julian, Urban Prefect.
Where application for complete restitution has been made within the prescribed
time, and further delay is asked by the plaintiff which comes within the term
required for restitution, it shall be granted, whenever demanded, after proper
cause has been shown. If, however, the delay requested exceeds the specified
time, it must be refused the plaintiff, just as if it had been demanded within
the legal time and had gone beyond its limits, for he had the right to
institute proceedings when the delay requested would not have exceeded the
remaining time.
(1) When the defence of the action requires delay, We order that, after proper
investigation, it shall be granted, without consideration of the time, because
the party himself was not responsible for not having the suit begun sooner.
Hence the delay should be granted, even though when this is done it may exceed
the term prescribed for bringing suit, by which delay, if obtained by the
defendant, the plain-
tiff himself will not be prevented from obtaining evidence in his own behalf.
Given at Rome, on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate
of Constantine-Caesar, Consul for the fifth time, and Maximus, 319.
7. The Emperor Justinian to John, Praetorian Prefect.
We, with the intention of abolishing the unnecessary distinction of the
available year, in proceedings for complete restitution, do hereby order that,
in ancient Rome, as well as in this Fair City, and in Italy, and all other
provinces, the term of four continuous years shall be employed; and that they
shall be computed from the day on which the available year began to run, and
that this rule shall be adopted everywhere; as it seems to Us perfectly absurd
that any distinction should be made with reference to different places.
We order that this delay shall not only be granted in the case of the
restitution of minors (when the available year began to run from the first day
of their twenty-sixth year), but also with reference to persons of full age, so
that the above-mentioned continuous time shall, instead of the available years,
be observed both for the purpose of instituting proceedings and ending
litigation.
(1) And as the fact that they are under age is excepted in the case of the
restitution of minors, so in the case of those who have attained their
majority, the time during which they were absent on business for the State, or
where they were engaged in any other lawful undertaking enumerated in the
ancient laws, is also excepted; and, in this respect, the restitution of minors
and persons who have attained their majority is not dissimilar.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof September, after the Consulate of
Lampadius and Orestes, Consuls for the fifth time, 531.
TITLE LIV.
FOR WHAT REASONS PERSONS WHO HAVE ATTAINED THEIR MAJORITY OBTAIN COMPLETE
RESTITUTION.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Aemilianus.
If you have had judgment rendered against you while absent and undefended, on
account of having performed the duties of My envoy in good faith, you very
justly desire the revival of the case, and permission to make use of all your
defences from the beginning; for it has been decided that those also, who
perform the duties of envoys, enjoy the same privileges to which those do who
are absent on business for the State are entitled.
Given on the fifth of the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of the two
Aspers, 213.
2. The Same to Dionysius.
If you prove before the Governor of the province that it is true that you were
unable to appear before the arbiter, for the reason that you
were detained in military custody by order of the Governor, you can begin the
action anew.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Laetus
and Cerealis, 216.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the . Caesars, to Proculus,
Decurion.
In bona fidecontracts, the laws come to the relief of persons of lawful age
also, through the official act of the judge who has cognizance of the case.
Given on the Nonesof August, during the Consulate of Diocletian and
Aristobolus, 285.
4. The Same to Priscianus.
The government usually enjoys the privilege of minors, and therefore it can
demand the relief of restitution.
Given on the eleventh of the Idesof November, during the Consulate of
Diocletian and Aristobolus, 285.
5. The Same to Licinianus.
If, having been taken prisoner by the enemy along with your father and mother,
the latter should die while in captivity, and you, having returned to your
country, should demand their estates by virtue of the Cornelian Law, you will
not be prevented from recovering the property by an action like that which is
granted for complete restitution opposing the exception of the time prescribed
by law (which it is customary to do).
Given on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.
TITLE LV.
CONCERNING AN ALIENATION MADE FOR THE PURPOSE OF CHANGING AN ACTION.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Attalus.
As possession provides a real action for an adversary, and complete restitution
is permitted by the Perpetual Edict, even when alienation of property has been
made for the purpose of changing the action, understand that if the person who
is in the possession of the same should sell and deliver it to a purchaser, to
avoid being sued, you have the legal right to choose against which of the
parties you will proceed.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.
TITLE LVI. CONCERNING THE APPOINTMENT OF ARBITERS.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Nepotiana.
It has frequently been stated in rescripts that an appeal cannot be taken from
the decision of an arbiter appointed after a compromise which has been made in
perfect compliance with law, because an action to enforce judgment cannot be
granted under these circumstances; and for this reason the promise of a penalty
is reciprocally made in order that, through fear of it, the parties may not
refuse to abide by the decision.
Where, however, judgment is rendered after the expiration of the time mentioned
in the compromise, it will be void, and the party who refuses to comply with it
will not be liable to any penalty.
Given at Rome, on the ninth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of
Antoninus, Consul for the fourth time, 223.
2. The Emperors Carus, Carinus, and Numerian to Clement.
If your adversary, in violation of the terms of the compromise, refuses to
appear before the arbiter who has been chosen, he will be considered to have
incurred the penalty agreed upon.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of Carus and
Carinus, 283.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Petronia.
If you do not comply with the award of the arbiters appointed under a
compromise, when the avarice or favor of those who rendered it is apparent, you
can avail yourself of the exception of malicious fraud against your daughter
bringing an action on the stipulation; but you will not be prevented from
proceeding against her under the clause providing against malicious fraud,
which is usually added to stipulations connected with compromise.
Given on the third of the Idesof January, during the Consulate of the same
Emperors, 293.
4. The Emperor Justinian to Demosthenes, Praetorian Prefect.
In order that perjury may not be committed in the case of arbiters, their
selection should be confirmed by the solemnity of an oath, and that opportunity
may not indiscriminately be afforded perfidious men to evade the decisions of
judges, We order that questions of this kind shall be decided by the arbiter as
follows:
(1) Where the same judge has been selected by both plaintiff and defendant, who
have agreed that the case shall proceed under the sanction of an oath, and the
litigants themselves have consented to this either in writing or in the
presence of public officials, or have stated it before the arbiter selected who
reduced it to writing, and it shall also be added that the arbiter himself
administered the oath
for the purpose of disposing of the case in accordance with the truth, We order
that the award shall, under all circumstances, remain unaltered, and that
neither the defendant nor the plaintiff can disobey it, but that they shall be
absolutely compelled to respect and comply
with it.
(2) If, however, nothing of this kind was either done or written by the
arbiter, but the parties themselves produced a statement in their own
handwriting, setting forth that they had bound themselves by oath to abide by
the decision of the arbiter, in this instance, his award shall be maintained
inviolate, for the reason that the statement of the parties themselves has the
same force, whether it was made in the beginning, or drawn up in the above-
mentioned manner at the time when the arbiter was chosen, or whether this
written instrument was found after final judgment was rendered, either for the
reason that the said parties confirmed the authority of the arbiter with the
solemn formality of an oath, or because they swore to execute what had already
been decided.
(3) If it is evident by the instruments or the statements already mentioned
that the arbiter himself alone took the oath, on the demand of the litigants,
that he would decide the case in accordance with the truth, the award in the
present instance, as in the former one, shall, in every respect, be valid
according to law.
(4) In all these cases, it shall be lawful for either an action in factum,a
personal action for recovery under the law, or an equitable real action to be
brought, according as circumstances may demand.
(5) If, however, nothing of this kind should appear, either in writing or in
the statements made, and only one party alleges that he has been sworn, no
faith shall be given to the award of the arbiter alone or to the statements of
one of the parties; for even if it should be admitted that an oath had been
taken, but not in the presence of the court, and no written evidence of either
of the parties was produced to show this, the conduct of an uncertain contest,
which frequently takes place among ignorant men, does not in the least deprive
the judgment of its force; but, in a case of this kind, all the rules should be
observed which the ancient authorities laid down with reference to the
selection of arbiters.
Extract from Novel 82, Chapter XI. Latin Text.
The new law provides that an arbiter shall not be appointed in such a way as to
decide under the sanction of an oath, but that he must fix a penalty which, if
paid, will permit a party to avoid the execution of the judgment. Where,
however, anything is done contrary to this, and the judge who decides
improperly does so through fraud, he may expect punishment from God; but if he
errs through ignorance, the oath will not be binding, nor will the litigants be
liable to punishment a second time.
THE TEXT OF THE CODE FOLLOWS.
(6) He who has stated in writing at the end of the award of the arbiter that he
approved of it, or that he would comply with it (by
using certain Greek terms for this purpose, which by custom are considered
preferable), although he may not have added "I promise," should be compelled by
the action in factumto perform what he agreed to; for what difference is there
when "I promise" is added to these words, or when the expression is absolutely
omitted? For if We have corrected many defects in stipulations, as well as
disposed of the innumerable circumlocutions and ambiguities with which they
were overwhelmed, after having abolished the ordinary formulas and the subtle
and superfluous statements which they contained, by means of laws recently
enacted by Us, why should We not remove all the perplexities of the ancient law
from instruments of this description, so that, where such an instrument is
drawn up, one of the parties will be obliged to acquiesce in it, and be
absolutely compelled to carry it into effect? For it is not probable that a
document of this kind has been written only for the purpose of having it
disputed; but rather in order that a decision, against which no opposition can
be manifested, may be executed.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of Decius,
529.
5. The Same to Julian, Praetorian Prefect.
As has previously been decided in the choice of arbiters, where no penalty for
the violation of a compromise was prescribed, and they were not appointed by a
judge, and no common selection was made in compliance with the preceding
decision, but this was done by common consent of the parties, the result will
be that if the award was in favor of the defendant, an exception on the ground
of contract will lie in his favor, but if it was in favor of the plaintiff, he
will obtain no advantage from it; and We order with reference to those arbiters
whom We have mentioned above, and who have been selected by common consent,
under an agreement either written or verbal, that their award must be
maintained; and if, after it has been rendered, the parties stated in writing
that they were not displeased with it, not only an exception based on the
agreement can be pleaded in behalf of the defendant, but also, by Our law, an
action in factum,will lie in favor of the plaintiff, so that he can direct the
award to be executed in this Imperial City by the Most Eminent Prefecture, or
by the court having jurisdiction of the defendant, and in the provinces this
can be done not only by the Governors, but by their subordinates, as well as by
the judges having jurisdiction over the person who was sued.
If, however, after the decision was rendered, the parties interested did not
sign the decree of the arbiter, but confirmed it by their silence, and within
the next ten days no protest was sent to the judge or by either party to his
adversary, by which it became evident that the award was not accepted, then it
is confirmed by the silence of the parties, and an exception will lie in favor
of the defendant, and the above-mentioned action in favor of the plaintiff.
Where, however, one of the parties, after having complied with the formalities
above
mentioned, and not being willing to have the award executed rejects it, no
prejudice to the rights of the parties will result, nor will the defendant have
a right to an exception, nor the plaintiff to an action. Those arbiters,
however, who have been chosen under the solemnity of an oath, are excepted
under a new constitution which We have promulgated, for in this case all the
provisions on this subject set forth in Our law must be complied with.
(1) Although We are not ignorant of the opinion of Julius Paulus, and of
certain other persons learned in the law, who have touched upon this question
which we are at present discussing, they have not treated it in the most
skilful manner, but have held that the decision should stand, so far as certain
temporary actions are concerned. We, however, decide in a more complete and
general way that an agreement entered into in writing in the presence of the
arbiter appointed as the result of a compromise, interrupts the prescription,
just as if the proceedings had been instituted before an ordinary judge.
(2) With reference to this point, We order that, generally speaking, in
controversies brought before arbiters, where a question of fact is involved,
the statements of the litigants or the witnesses can also be made in the
presence of ordinary judges.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof ..., during the Consulate of Lampadius and
Orestes, 530.
6. The Same to John, Praetorian Prefect.
We order that women shall be mindful of their modesty, and confine themselves
to the performance of those functions for which Nature has designated them, and
avoid those from which she has ordered them to abstain; and although where
those of the highest reputation may have accepted the office of arbiter, or
where, being patronesses, they have acted in this capacity for their freedmen,
they shall be separated from all judicial duties, so that no penalty can be
imposed for their selection, and no exception on the ground of an agreement can
be pleaded against such persons as justly despise their decisions.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Lampadius and Orestes, 530.
TITLE LVII. CONCERNING THE FURNISHING OF SECURITY.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian and the Caesars.
It is a certain rule of law that anyone who becomes the attorney of the
plaintiff shall not be compelled to furnish security that his principal will
ratify his act; for, in this case, the attorney should be understood to appear,
as it were, in the presence of him who employed him. Therefore, if the
constituent, having afterwards changed his mind, should be unwilling for his
attorney to represent him, the judge must consider everything which the
attorney has done in the case as valid. Where, however, in the beginning of the
action, he is opposed
by an allegation of the defence, and he himself is, in this instance,
considered as the attorney of the absent party, he ought to be compelled to
give security to offer a defence against the exception; and if he does not do
so, the judge should not permit the case which was brought against him to
proceed further. The attorney, or the defender of the party sued, however, even
though he was appointed in the presence of witnesses, shall, in all cases, at
the commencement of the proceedings, be compelled to furnish security to pay
any judgment which may be rendered against him.
Given on the ninth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.

TITLE LVIII.
CONCERNING THE SUPPRESSION OF FORMULAS AND CLAIMS, OR RIGHTS OF ACTION.

1. The Emperor Constantine to Marcellinus, Governor of Phoenicia.
The legal formulas which, by the subtlety of their phraseology, menaced all
pleadings, shall be absolutely suppressed.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of
Constantius, Consul for the third time, and Constans, Consul for the second
time, 342.

2. The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian to Hierius, Urban Prefect.
No exception in a case of more or less importance shall be pleaded against
anyone on account of an action not having been granted, if it should be
established that the said action is applicable to the matter in question, and
has reference to the cause for which suit was brought.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Felix and
Taurus, 428.

TITLE LIX.
CONCERNING THE TENDER OF THE OATH WITH REFERENCE TO CALUMNY.
1. The Emperor Justinian to Demosthenes, Praetorian Prefect.
In all cases, whether you base your action upon private papers, public
documents, or upon anything else which requires the production of evidence, We
order that it shall not be produced unless the party who demands it first takes
the oath relating to calumny, and swears that he does not make these
allegations for the purpose of postponing judgment; for the contentious
activity of litigants is restrained by fear of the oath.
(1) In order that certain persons may not indulge the cruelty of their
dispositions by unnecessarily subjecting their slaves to torture,
those who ask that slaves should be put to the question shall not have their
request complied with, nor shall they be heard by the judges, unless, placing
their hands upon the Holy Scriptures, they swear that they do not make this
application on account of hatred of the slaves, or because they are offended
against their co-heirs, but for the reason that they cannot otherwise ascertain
or establish the truth of matters relating to the estate.
Given at Constantinople, on the twelfth of the Kalendsof October, during the
fifth Consulate of Decius, 529.
Extract from Novel 49, Chapter III. Latin Text.
This oath is not exacted at present, as in the beginning of the action the
party swears not to demand anything from malicious motives during the entire
proceedings.
2. The Same to John, Praetorian Prefect.
As We have already decided that judges shall not dispose of cases unless in the
presence of the Holy Gospels, and decreed that advocates throughout the entire
dominions of the Roman Empire must first be sworn before undertaking the
conduct of cases, We consider it necessary to promulgate the present law, by
which We order that in all litigation begun after it has been published,
neither the plaintiff nor the defendant can, in the beginning of an action,
state their claims, unless, after they have filed their petitions and answered,
and before the advocates on both sides have taken the oath prescribed by law,
the principals themselves have been sworn. The plaintiff shall swear that he
has not brought suit through enmity, but that he thinks that he has a good
reason for doing so, and the defendant shall not be permitted to prove his
allegations, unless he himself first makes oath that he has entered the contest
with confidence in the justness of his cause; and, after this, the learned
advocates on both sides (as has already been decreed by Us), shall be sworn
upon the Holy Gospels placed before the judge.
Extract from Novel 49, Chapter III. Latin Text.
There should be added to this oath, in order to prevent it from being
frequently taken during the proceedings, that no evidence will be required
during the entire case, except such as the parties may think necessary to be
produced in order to ascertain the truth.
Extract from Novel 124, Chapter I. Latin Text.
The principal parties, or those to whom in the meantime the case has been
transferred, shall swear in the presence of the judges that they have not
promised, or given anything whatever, either to the latter or to anyone else,
for the purpose of obtaining their favor; and that they will not afterwards
give anything either directly, or through the medium of others, excepting to
those who have been employed as their own advocates, and to the other persons
to whom Our laws permit payment to be made.
(1) When lawsuits, or requests for advice, are brought before Our Sacred
Consistory, the oath above mentioned shall be taken in the presence of the
Senate.
(2) If any of the litigants should be unable to appear in court, they, along
with the adverse party, shall take the aforesaid oath in the presence of
officers appointed for this purpose by the judge.
(3) A woman of noble rank, during the absence of her adversary, shall also be
sworn in the presence of the officers.
(4) If the parties happen to be elsewhere, or if one of them should be absent,
they shall be sworn before the judge of the province, or the defenders of the
district, and the fact shall be recorded.
(5) When one of the litigants refuses to take the aforesaid oath, if he is the
plaintiff, he shall lose his action by the decision of the magistrate; if he is
the defendant, he shall have judgment rendered against him.
(6) Guardians and curators must take the above-mentioned oath in actions which
they bring.
THE TEXT OF THE CODE FOLLOWS.
(1) If, however, the rank or sex of the party does not permit him or her to
appear in court, the oath shall be taken in the house of the litigant, of
course, in the presence of the other party, or his attorney.
(2) It must be noted that where guardians or curators, or any other persons who
transact the business of others, by lawful authority, are concerned, it is
proper that they, also, should be subjected to the requirement of the oath,
because they understand the case which they are conducting. For neither a ward,
a minor, nor any other persons of this kind can be familiar with it; and hence
none are obliged to appear in court except such as have charge of the
guardianship or curatorship, or some other legal administration. For this
reason they must swear according to the knowledge which they possess, and
although the true nature of the case may perhaps be different, still, what each
one believes and thinks must be sworn to, and all other oaths which have come
down to us from former laws, or which have been established by Ourselves, shall
remain in full force.
(3) Where, however, either of the parties is absent, and his case is conducted
by an attorney, if it is the plaintiff, he cannot be permitted to direct his
attorney to proceed before he himself takes the oath of calumny, with the
proper formalities, in the province in which he resides.
In like manner, if the defendant should be absent, and has appointed an
attorney, and agreed by a stipulation to pay any judgment which might be
rendered against him, or if a defender should voluntarily appear for him, he
himself shall be sworn as hereinbefore prescribed, in the presence of the
plaintiff, or in that of his duly appointed attorney, or even in his absence
(if the judge should permit it), which act must be made a matter of record.
(4) But for the reason that We fear that the parties, being in collusion, may
perhaps dispense with this oath to be taken by them, and by such dissimulation
evade Our law, We order all judges, even though they only have jurisdiction by
virtue of a compromise, to use every effort to prevent the oath from being
avoided, and under all circumstances to require it to be taken by both
plaintiff and defendant; as We have promulgated the present law for the common
welfare, and not for the convenience of individuals, in order that this
proceeding may not, little by little, fall into disuse, and the oath of the
principal parties or advocates in some way or other be curtailed.
(5) We have also decided that the following addition should be made to this
law; namely, if anyone should desire to bring an action for another, without
any mandate having been given, but after having furnished security that his
principal will ratify whatever he has done in the matter, the law shall not be
considered to have been evaded by means of this artifice; and We order that if
anything of this kind should take place hereafter (whether someone desires to
bring suit in behalf of an individual, or for a corporate body, a village, or
any other association), he must furnish the usual security; but he cannot
proceed further with the action unless, within the time fixed by the judge, the
latter causes the principal parties to be sworn, either in the presence of
their adversary, or (if the latter prefers it), in the presence of the
attorney; and, if the other party is not present, the oath of calumny shall be
taken and duly recorded in the presence of the defender of the district, either
by the party for whose benefit the action was brought, or by the majority, or
the most prominent of the members of the association.
(6) Where, however, the plaintiff is unwilling to take the oath of calumny, and
this fact is legally established, he shall not be permitted to proceed with the
case, but he shall lose it as a dishonest litigant, the displeasure of the
judges toward him shall be manifested by a severe reprimand, and he shall be
deprived of all hope of obtaining a judgment.
(7) If the defendant should refuse to take this oath, he shall be considered as
having confessed the truth of everything set forth in the petition of the
plaintiff, and the judge can render a decision according as the nature of the
case may suggest.
(8) In this manner, not only the number of lawsuits, but also that of
calumniators will be diminished, and men will think that they are rather in
sanctuaries than in courts of justice. For if the principal parties- among the
litigants conduct their actions after taking this oath, and their advocates
also take it, and the magistrates themselves hear the cases, and pronounce
judgment in the presence of the Holy Scriptures, what else can be believed than
that God himself is the judge of men in all their cases? Hence the ancient oath
of calumny, together with all its subterfuges, having been abolished, Our clear
and comprehensive Constitution shall shine throughout all countries, and be the
best remedy for the disposal of litigation.
(9) We desire that the above-mentioned oath shall be taken at the very origin
of a case, when litigation has not yet been begun. Where, however, causes are
already pending, or where issue has been joined and the ordinary judicial
security has been furnished, both parties shall be compelled to take the oath
in the same city or province in which they dwell, immediately after the
promulgation of this law. If one of them should be absent, the trial of the
case ought not to be deferred on this account, and any other course will be
contrary to what We have prescribed, and what has been introduced to shorten
litigation will at once be changed to the opposite; hence We order that the
party who is present must, without fail, take the oath, and that the absent
party shall be excused from doing so, provided, however, that the case is
pending (as has been previously stated). When both of the principal parties are
absent, to prevent litigation from being protracted for too long a time, cases
that are pending can proceed without the oath.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Justinian,
Consul for the fourth time, and Paulinus, 534.
