# -*- mode: org -*-

* BOOK V.


* TITLE I. CONCERNING BETROTHALS, BETROTHAL PLEDGES, AND MARRIAGE BROKERS.

1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Annonaria.
She who has already been betrothed to one man is not forbidden to repudiate her
contract, and marry another.
2. The Emperor Constcmtius, and, the Csesar Constans, to Cozlius Probinus,
Prefect of the City.
If a man should, while residing in the same province agree to marry a girl and
fail to do so within the term of two years, and the girl, after the expiration
of the said time, should afterwards form an union with another, she will not be
guilty of fraud who, by contracting marriage, did not any longer suffer her
vows to be treated with contempt.1
3. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Eutro-ffius, Prsetorian
Prefect.
If, after the pledges of betrothal have been given, either of the parties
should die, We order the gifts to be returned, unless the deceased person had
already given cause for not celebrating the marriage.
1 No right of action for damages based on breach of promise of marriage was
recognized by the Civil Law, and it is also unknown to the European nations
whose jurisprudence is derived from it. This remedy, which affords such
favorable opportunities for the exercise of private blackmail and professional
rapacity, is of English origin. Unauthorized by the Common Law, it only
obtained a foothold in the English courts about the middle of the seventeenth
century, and when first brought to judicial notice, eminent jurists asserted
that there was no precedent for such a proceeding. This was probably due to the
fact that, by the Canon Law, a solemn promise to marry is practically
equivalent to actual matrimony.
In Scotland, where the intervention of neither priest nor magistrate is
essential, and the parties may merely declare their consent in the presence of
witnesses, an informal promise of marriage, followed by copulation, renders
them husband and wife without any further ceremony. (VideErskine, Principles of
the Law of Scotland, I, VI, 2.)
The abuse of the laws authorizing suits for breach of promise is far more
flagrant in the United States than elsewhere.---ED.
4. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Marianus, Prsetorian Prefect.
When a father makes a contract with reference to the marriage of his daughter,
and is not able to carry it out on account of his death, whatever is proved to
have been agreed to by the betrothed parties shall remain inviolate, and any
compromise shown to have been made for the benefit of a minor by a guardian.or
curator shall be of no force or effect; for it would be extremely unjust for
the decision of a guardian or a curator which was perhaps purchased, to be
adopted in opposition to the wish of a father; especially as the greater number
of women are even found to favor opinions contrary to their own interests.
Given on the third of the Nonesof November, during the Consulate of Honorius,
Consul for the thirteenth time, and Theodosius, Consul for the tenth time, 422.
5. The Emperors Leo and Anthemius to Erythrius, Prsetorian Prefect.
A woman, who is her own mistress, is liable for double the amount of the
betrothal gift, that is to say, for what she received and as much again; but no
more than that, if, at the time she had completed her twenty-fifth year, or had
obtained indulgence on account of her age which was proved in a competent
court. She will be liable for the simple amount, that is to say, for only what
she received, if she was a minor, whether she was a virgin or a widow, and had
received the pledge of betrothal herself, or by her guardian or curator, or
anyone else.
It is, however, established that when either a father or a mother of lawful age
has either jointly or severally received a betrothal gift for their daughter,
or a grandfather or a great-grandfather has received it for a granddaughter or
a great-granddaughter, he shall be liable for double the amount.
We order that these rules shall be observed if the intended marriage has not
been prevented, on account of the person, or his or her condition, or any other
cause prohibited by the laws or general constitutions; for then We order that
the betrothal gift shall be returned as having been given without a cause, just
as if nothing had been done.
(1) We also add to this that, even when the intended marriage is not prohibited
by law, if, after the pledge has been given, the girl refuses to marry her
betrothed on account of his being of low character, or a spendthrift; or
because of his shameless conduct; or for the reason that he belongs to a
different religion or sect; or because he is a man incapable of performing the
sexual act (from which the hope of offspring arises) ; or on account of some
other just excuse; or if, indeed, it should be proved that before the betrothal
gift was made, the woman herself, or her parents knew these facts; they
themselves will be to blame. If, however, not being aware of them, they
accepted the betrothal gift, or if, after it was given, some good reason arose
to
induce them to change their minds, after returning the gift, they shall be free
from any penalty.
We decree that all these rules shall likewise be observed with ref-. erence to
men who are betrothed, whether they have received or bestowed such gifts, and
that the penalty of quadruple damages, which was mentioned in former laws by
which the amount of the betrothal gift was prescribed, shall be abolished;
unless something with reference to the said quadruple damages should be
especially agreed upon by the common consent of the contracting parties.
Where anything providing for a penalty exceeding that prescribed by the terms
of this law has been inserted in the stipulation, it shall be void, so far as
both parties are concerned, as when marriage is contracted absolute freedom
should exist.
Given on the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Martian and Zeno, 469.


* TITLE II.
WHERE THE GOVERNOR OF A PROVINCE OR ANY OP His SUBORDINATES GIVE BETROTHAL
PLEDGES.

1. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Eutro-pius, Prsetorian
Prefect.
When anyone placed in a public position, and invested with the administration
of a province, who is able to inspire fear in parents, guardians, curators, or
the parties themselves that are about to contract matrimony, bestows betrothal
gifts, We order that if, hereafter, either the parents or the parties
themselves should change their minds, they shall not only be released from the
restraints of the law, but also be free from the prescribed penalty, and,
moreover, shall profit by the gifts bestowed, if they do not think that they
should be returned.
We desire that this law shall not only include public officials, but also their
children, grandchildren, relatives, and subordinates; that is to say, that it
shall apply to their counsellors and attendants, whom the said public officials
employ in the matter. We do not forbid the marriage to take place after the
functionary has relinquished his office, when the betrothed parties consent
that the obligation for the articles donated during the term of the persons of
whom We have spoken shall continue to exist.
Given at Thessalonica, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof July, under the
Consulate of Gratian, Consul for the fifth time, and Theodosius, 280.



* TITLE III.
CONCERNING ANTENUPTIAL DONATIONS, OR THOSE GIVEN ON ACCOUNT OF MARRIAGE AND
BETROTHALS.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Metrodorus.It makes a great deal of
difference whether the property that a prospective husband donates to his
future wife is delivered to her,
and is afterwards received by him as dowry; or whether by giving it he intended
to increase the dowry, so that he might appear to have received a larger sum
than actually came into his hands.
In the first instance, the gift is not prohibited by law, and the property
given by way of donation is included in the dowry, and can be recovered by the
action of dowry. In the latter instance, however, the donation has no legal
effect, and what has been given as part of the dowry cannot be recovered.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Attains.
If you prove before the Governor of the province that you have given presents
to the parents of Eutychia, in order to be able to marry her, he will order
that unless Eutychia marries you what you have given shall be returned to you.
3. The Same to Marcella.
Where a promise has already been made by your brother on account of his
betrothal, even if it is included in the stipulation, it still cannot be
enforced, as the wife deceived her husband with reference to the dowry.
Therefore you can properly interpose an exception on the ground of bad faith
against an action brought under the stipulation.
4. The Emperor Gordian to Marcellus.
Anything which is given to a betrothed woman by her intended husband, under the
condition that she shall acquire the ownership of the property when the
marriage takes place, is without any effect.
5. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to Theodora.
You cannot legally recover anything which the person who pretended to be
unmarried promised you as his betrothed, and who at the time that he asked you
to marry him had another wife at home, as you are not his betrothed, for the
reason that he already had a wife.
6. The Emperor Aurelian to "Donata.
As you state that a simple donation was made to you on the day of your
marriage, and as it seems to be doubtful whether it was given by your betrothed
or your husband, a distinction must be made; for if the gift was received in
your own house, it will be considered as an ante-nuptial donation. If, however,
your betrothed gave it in his house, it can be revoked, for you then were his
wife.
7. The Emperors Cams, Carinus, and Numerian to Luciana.
If,when ante-nuptial gifts are made, it is agreed, and the agreement is reduced
to writing, that if anything should happen to prevent one of the contracting
parties from carrying out his or her intention, and the marriage from taking
place, then whatever was given shall be returned to whoever gave it, or to his
heir; he who obtains the estate of the person from whom the girl received the
gifts under the abovementioned condition can recover the same by law.
8. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Euphrosina.
Where anyone, over the age of twenty-five years, before marriage, has (even
previous to the betrothal) given to his intended wife a tract of land, and she
has been placed in possession of the same, it is a positive and clear rule of
law that he cannot alienate it afterwards under any title, if he lives; or
leave it by will, if he dies.
9. The Same Emperors and Ctesars to Julian.
As you acknowledge that you have given a present to the betrothed of your son,
such a perfected donation which your consent and the authority of the law have
ratified cannot be rescinded by Our Rescript.
10. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Dionysius.
If the betrothed of your daughter gave her a slave, and you, by way of
liberality, presented her with beasts of burden, and the marriage did not take
place, and he, contrary to the provisions of the law, took away what he gave, a
reciprocal restitution of what was donated on both sides will not take place,
but an action for the recovery of what he unlawfully removed will lie.
11. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Nea.
If your betrothed, as a mark of his generosity, gave you property which
belonged to him, the donation does not become void for the reason that he was
afterwards killed by the enemy.
12. The Same Emperors and Czesars to Timothea and Cleotina.
If your mother has given certain lands to the betrothed or husband of her
daughter without stating any condition as to their recovery, and has placed him
in the possession of the same, and the marriage should be dissolved by divorce,
the donation, being perfect, will not be annulled.
13. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Alexander.
The creditors of a husband cannot sue his betrothed to obtain the property
given to her by way of donation, unless they can prove that it was previously
encumbered to them.
14. The Same, and the Csesars, to Aurelia.
If the betrothed of your daughter gave her some slaves, with the consent of her
mother, they having been received as dowry without any appraisement, and he
should die after marriage, the mother, who was also the heir of the deceased
husband, will not make proper restitution by offering their value in their
stead.
15. The Emperor Constantine to Maximus, Urban Prefect.
As the opinion of the ancients, which declared that donations made to a
betrothed woman were valid, even if the marriage was not cele-
brated, is displeasing to Us, We order that anything legally given by way of
donation to betrothed persons by one another shall be subject to the following
rule, namely, that whether it was given in consideration of marriage or not, or
whether the parties are under the control of their parents or independent, the
gift shall be considered as having been given in consideration of future
marriage, if it is bestowed with the consent of their parents; and if, indeed,
the man or his parents are unwilling to consent to the marriage, whatever has
been donated by him cannot be recovered if it has been delivered, and if any of
the property should be in the hands of the donor, it shall be transferred to
the betrothed woman, and her heirs, without any attempt at evasion. Where,
however, the betrothed woman, or the person under whose control she is, is
responsible for the marriage not being contracted, then the gift shall be
returned to the betrothed man himself, or to his heirs, without any deduction,
by means of a personal action for recovery, or by an equitable action in rem.
This rule must also be observed where the donation is made by the woman to her
betrothed.
Given at Rome, on the sixth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Constantine, Consul for the fifth time, and Licinius, 319.
16. The Same to Tiberianus, Vicegerent of the Spains.
If, after a donation has been made by a man to his betrothed, and the kiss has
taken place, one of the parties should happen to die before the marriage, We
order that half of the property which was given shall belong to the survivor,
and the other half to the heirs of the deceased, no matter to what degree they
may belong, or under what right they may succeed; so that the donation may
appear to stand so far as half of it is concerned, and be annulled with
reference to the other half. If the kiss did not take place, and either of the
parties should die, the donation shall be wholly void, and be returned to the
donor and his heirs. Whether the kiss took place or not, if either of the
parties should die before the marriage, and anything was given to the man by
way of donation (which rarely happens) it shall be entirely annulled, and the
ownership of the property bestowed shall be transferred to the woman who
donated it, or to her successors.1
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Nepotian
and Pacatus, 336.
17. The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian to Hierus, Prse-torian Prefect.
The interests of female minors are very properly provided for, when they are
deprived of the assistance of their fathers, by confirming donations made
before marriage, where the acknowledgment of the parties has been omitted.
1 Among the Romans, the kiss given to the prospective bride was, as appears
from the text, an essential part of the ceremony of betrothal; and survives in
that now usually bestowed immediately after the marriage has been
solemnized.---ED.
Given at Constantinople, on the tenth of the Kalendsof Marc'h, during the
Consulate of Taurus and Felix, 428.
18. The Emperor Zeno to Sebastian, Prsstorian Prefect.
If a father, after having had children by a former marriage, should marry a
second time, or not, he cannot be compelled to leave any part of an ante-
nuptial donation to the children of his first wife, which either he himself, or
someone else gave to the said wife the mother of their common children; as a
mother cannot be compelled to preserve anything for any children by her first
marriage (after she has contracted a second one) out of the dowry which she
gave to their father, or that any other person gave him in her behalf, and with
all the more reason if she did not take a second husband.
19. The Emperor Justinian to Archelaus, Prsetorian Prefect.
If, during marriage, the wife, or anyone else in her name, should form the
design to increase her dowry, it shall still be permitted the husband, or
anyone else in his behalf, to increase the antenuptial donation to the extent
that the dowry is augmented; and it cannot be objected to generosity of this
kind that it was forbidden at the time of the marriage, for indulgence should
be granted to the common consent of the parties, for fear that if the power of
increasing the donation is refused, the increase of the dowry may be interfered
with.
We order that the same rule shall also apply to those marriages in which it
sometimes happens that no ante-nuptial donation is given, but that the woman
only offers a dowry to her husband; so that when she increases her dowry, the
husband shall likewise be permitted to increase his donation to his wife, to
the same extent that the dowry is known to be increased, if the parties have
consented to the return or retention of the increased dowry or donation;
whether this has been done in compliance with the agreements prescribed by the
ancients, or with those at present established, which, having reference to the
ante-nuptial donation and the constitution of the dowry, were entered into at
the commencement of the marriage.
Again, the rights of hypothecation, which arise from the increase of the dowry
or donation, acquire their force from the date when the said hypothecation was
contracted, and should not be referred to the time of the former dowry, or to
that of the ante-nuptial donation.
If, however, on the other hand, both the husband and wife should agree to
diminish the dowry and the ante-nuptial donation, they shall be permitted to
diminish the latter in the same way that the diminution of the dowry is
effected, and any agreements entered into with reference to the diminution of
both shall be understood to be valid and legal, except, for instance, in those
cases in which either the husband, having children by a former marriage,
marries again, or the wife in like manner, while children by a former marriage
are living, Unites herself to a second husband; for in this second marriage,
whether the husband or the wife, or both of them are concerned (if this should
happen), We decree that any diminution of the dowry or
the ante-nuptial donation shall be prohibited, in order to avoid any advantage
being taken of children by a former marriage.
Extract from Novel 97, Chapter VII. Latin Text.
Now, however, if one party makes an increase the other must also do so, and if
the husband is not prevented by his debts, the increase can be made of any kind
of property whatsoever. But if he is in debt, in order to avoid any suspicion
of fraud against his creditors, all his immovable property will be liable for
the increase of the dowry, for if the woman, while owning real estate, should
give movable property to increase her dowry, she cannot avail herself of her
privilege against other creditors with reference to this portion of it.
20. The Emperor Justinian to John, Prsetorian Prefect.
As many complaints have been made to Us against husbands who, for the purpose
of deceiving their wives, have made them donations which from ancient times
have been designated ante-nuptial, but have neglected to have them recorded in
order that they may remain imperfect, and they themselves enjoy the advantages
of the dowry, while their wives are left without any remedy, so far as the
antenuptial donation is concerned, We order that this abuse shall be corrected
by changing the name of the gift, which shall hereafter be called not an ante-
nuptial donation, but a donation on account of marriage.
Therefore, as a woman is allowed to give a dowry to her husband during
marriage, why should the husband only be permitted to give a donation to his
wife before marriage? Can this difference be considered reasonable, since,
because of the weakness of the sex it is better to come to the relief of wives
than of husbands? For as the dowry can only be given on account of marriage,
and none can be held to exist without it, and marriage can even be celebrated
without a dowry, so, in the case of gifts donated by husbands, or by others in
their behalf, the latter should be absolutely free to make such donations
during marriage, because a present of this kind can be regarded as an advantage
to be enjoyed by the wife, and not as a simple present; and for this reason the
founders of the ancient law included dowries among donations.
Hence if an ante-nuptial donation does not differ either in name or fact from a
dowry, why should it not, in like manner, be given during marriage? Therefore,
We order that all persons, whether they have contracted marriage before or
afterwards, shall be permitted to give donations to their wives on account of
the gift of the dowry, in order that they may not be understood to be simple
gifts, but bestowed in consideration of the dowry and the marriage.
Extract from Novel 61, Chapter I. Latin Text.
An action in rem,founded on a donation of this kind, is granted to the woman
against all possessors.
END OP THE EXTRACT.
THE TEXT OF THE CODE FOLLOWS.
Simple donations are not made on account of marriage, but they are forbidden to
be made for this reason; lest this may be done for other considerations, for
instance, on account of licentiousness, or because of the poverty of one of the
parties, and not be attributable to the affection growing out of the marriage
itself; therefore if the dowry has already been given, and the husband, not
having made an antenuptial donation, prefers to make his wife a present
(provided it does not exceed the amount of the dowry, and he states that the
said present is not made as a simple donation, but on account of the dowry
which has already been given, and which itself amounts to as much as the
donation), he shall be permitted to do so, and the said present shall be
inserted in the dotal contracts. Where, however, a donation of this kind has
taken place, even though the dotal instrument may previously have been drawn
up, and no mention of a post nuptial donation included therein, it shall be
understood to have been agreed upon in accordance with the provisions of the
dotal contract, to enable both the dowry as well as the donation to stand upon
the same footing, in order that the Leonine Constitution (which has reference
to the quality of the agreement, and not to the amount of the property, but to
the shares thereof), may, in cases of this kind, remain intact, and not only be
observed without alteration, but that any ambiguity which it contains may be
removed by the interpretation which We have made. For where unequal contracts
have been entered into, We decree that the greater part of the benefit shall be
reduced, so as to be equal to the less, and both parties enjoy the smaller
amount to the same extent.
Extract from Novel 91, Chapter II. Latin Text.
When a dowry has been given, it should be followed by a donation on account of
marriage. Moreover, if the woman is ready to pay her dowry, and her husband
refuses to accept it, she can call witnesses to establish this fact, and if the
dowry is composed of personal property, she can deposit it, after sealing it
up; or having appeared in court, she can demand that her husband be notified,
and, under such circumstances, the acceptance of the donation cannot be
declined. If, however, there is any delay in giving the husband the dowry, the
donation can also be refused.
END OF THE EXTRACT.
THE TEXT OF THE CODE FOLLOWS.
(1) In like manner, if a gift of this kind should be made (which was formerly
designated an ante-nuptial donation but is now styled one on account of
marriage), and it has not been evidenced by the execution of an instrument, it
will be lawful to do this during marriage; and no objection can be raised on
account of the marriage having taken place. If, however, this is permitted to
be done after marriage, much more reason exists for the instrument to be drawn
up.
Moreover, the Constitution which We have promulgated with ref-
erence to the increase of dowries and ante-nuptial donations shall remain
intact and inviolate; and all other laws either enacted by the ancients or by
Us, with reference to simple donations made between husband and wife during
marriage, shall remain in full force.
Extract from Novel 127, Chapter I. Latin Text.
The result of this is that a gift in consideration of marriage is effected by
means of a special contract, which does not require to be recorded, even if the
donation is bestowed by another, provided it is done in the name of the
husband, and he himself mentions this in the contract. This rule also applies
to the woman. If, however, the husband, or anyone else who made the donation,
did not have it recorded, and the amount is legal, and by the dotal agreement
it is granted to the husband, he will not be entitled to any action with
reference to it. A father is not compelled to preserve for the children by a
former marriage a donation which he made to his wife in consideration of
marriage, even if he should marry again. The case, however, is otherwise when a
part of the dowry remains in the hands of the husband, or a part of the
donation in the hands of the wife; for then it should be preserved for the
children by the former marriage.
Extract from Novel 127, Chapter II. Latin Text.
At present, a diminution is forbidden to avoid fraud being committed against
the children by a former marriage; and as much must be given to each of them as
the husband gave to his second wife, even though one child may have received a
smaller amount.
The same rule also applies to the woman.



* TITLE IV. CONCERNING MARRIAGE.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Porcius.
When a question arises with reference to the marriage of a young girl, and the
guardian, the mother, and the relatives cannot agree as to the selection of a
husband, the decision of the Governor of the province must be obtained.
2. The Same to Trophima.
If your father consented to your marriage, it makes no difference, so far as
you are concerned, if he did not sign the marriage contract.
3. The Same to Valeria,.
You can, before a competent judge, accuse a freedman who has dared to marry his
patroness, or the daughter, the wife, the granddaughter, or the great-
granddaughter of his patron, in order that a decision may be rendered in
accordance with the customs of the present times, which very properly regard an
union of this kind as odious.
4. The Emperor Alexander to Perpetuus.
Children cannot marry the concubines of their ascendants, for the reason that
an act of this kind when committed by them is not praiseworthy, and indicates a
lack of filial duty. Those who violate this law are guilty of the crime of
fornication.
5. The Same to Maxima.
If (as you allege) your husband's father, under whose power he was, having
learned of your marriage, did not oppose it, you should not fear that he will
not recognize his grandson.
6. The Emperor Gordian to Valeria.
When, contrary to the command of the Emperor, a marriage with an official has
taken place in a province with the consent of the woman, still, if she remains
of the same mind after the man has relinquished his employment, the marriage
becomes legal, and hence any children who have been conceived and born of it
are legitimate, as is set forth in the opinion of the most learned Paulus.
7. The Same to Aper.
If (as you state) after a complaint has been made to you by your daughter
against her husband, the marriage was dissolved, and the parties again became
united without your consent, the marriage is illegitimate, as it was contracted
without the consent of the father, under whose control the woman was, and
therefore, as your daughter does not claim her dowry, you will not be prevented
from bringing suit to recover it.
'8. The Same to Romanus.
In questions relating to marriage, neither the authority of the curator (which
only extends to the administration of the property of the minor) nor that of
the blood-relatives or connections can be interposed, but the will of the
person whose marriage in question should be considered.
9. The Emperor Probus to Fortunatus.
When, with the knowledge of your neighbors or others, you keep your wife at
home for the purpose of having children, and a daughter is born of this
marriage, although neither the nuptial contract nor the birth certificate of
the daughter may have been published, the fact of the marriage and the
legitimate birth of your daughter are none the less established on that
account.
10. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Paulina.
As you allege that you did not attain to the rank of an illustrious woman
because your father was a senator, but for the reason that you contracted
marriage with a member of the Senate, you will lose the exalted position which
you obtained from your first husband, and be
reduced to your former status, if you should subsequently marry a man of
inferior degree.
11. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Alexander.
If your wife is detained by her parents without her consent, and Our friend the
Governor of the province is notified of the fact, he will grant your request,
and having caused the woman to be produced, you can consult her wishes in the
matter.
12. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Sabinus.
The policy of the law does not permit that even a son under paternal control
shall be compelled to marry against his consent. Therefore if you observe the
ordinary legal precepts, you will not be prevented from marrying the wife whom
you may choose, if you desire to do so, provided, however, that your father
consents to the marriage.
13. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Onesimus.
Instruments drawn up for the proof of marriage are not suitable for that
purpose when the ceremony does not take place and they contain what is not
true; but where no instruments have been drawn up, a marriage which has been
contracted with the requisite formalities is not void, since by the failure to
reduce the contract to writing, the other evidence of its solemnization is not
invalidated.
14. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Titius.
No one can be compelled either to contract marriage in the beginning, or to
renew it after it has once been dissolved. Therefore you understand that the
unrestrained power of dissolving and contracting marriage cannot be rendered a
matter of necessity.
15. The Same Emperors and Csssars to Tatian.
Anyone who has manumitted a slave is not forbidden to marry her, if he does not
belong to one of those classes of persons especially prohibited from doing so;
and it is absolutely certain that legitimate children can be born to a father
by such a marriage.
Extract from Novel 78, Chapter III. Latin Text.
By the new law, however, no rank prevents anyone from marrying his freedwoman,
provided dotal instruments are drawn up with reference to the marriage.
16. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Rhodonus.
It is proper that a father who exposed his daughter, who was taken by you and
brought up at your expense, and under your care, should consent for her to be
married to your son. If, however, he refuses to give his consent, he should be
compelled to do so only in case he indemnifies you for the maintenance which
you provided for his daughter.
17. The Same Emperors and Csesars.
No one shall be permitted to contract marriage with his daughter, his
granddaughter, or his great-granddaughter, his mother, his grandmother, or his
great-grandmother; and, in the collateral line, with his paternal or maternal
aunt, his sister, the daughter of his sister, or her granddaughter; nor with
the daughter of his brother, or his granddaughter; and among connections by
marriage, with his stepdaughter, his stepmother, his daughter-in-law, his
mother-in-law, or any other persons prohibited by ancient law, with whom We
desire that all persons shall abstain from contracting marriage.
18. The Emperors Valentinian, Valens, and Gratian to the Senate.
Widows under the age of twenty-five, even though they may have obtained the
freedom of emancipation, still cannot marry a second time without the consent
of their fathers. If, however, in the choice of a husband, the desire of the
woman is opposed to that of her father, and other relatives, it is established
(just as has already been decreed with reference to the marriage of virgins),
that judicial authority should be interposed for the purpose of examination,
and if the parties are equal in family, and in morals, he shall be considered
preferable whom the woman has selected for herself. But in order to prevent
those who are nearest in degree to the succession of widows, from hindering the
latter from contracting honorable marriage, where any suspicion of this kind
arises, We desire that authority of the courts should be invoked to prevent her
estate from descending to them, if death should occur.
Given on the seventeenth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of
Gratian, Consul for the second time, and Probus, 371.
19. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Eutychianus, Prse-torian Prefect.
Marriage between first cousins is permitted by this salutary law, so that the
former one having been annulled, and the temptation to calumny having been
restrained, marriage between such cousins shall be considered lawful, whether
they are the children of two brothers, or of two sisters, or of brother and
sister; and any children by such a marriage shall be legitimate and can become
the heirs of their parents.
Given during the Consulate of Stilicho, Consul for the second time, and
Anthemius, 405.
20. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Theodore, Praetorian Prefect.
The wishes of the father are to be considered in case of the marriage of
daughters under paternal control. Where, however, a girl is her own mistress,
and is under twenty-five years of age, the consent of her father must be
obtained. Where she is deprived of the aid of her father, the consent of her
mother and her kindred, as well as of herself, will be necessary.
If, however, having lost both her parents, she has been placed under the
protection of a curator, and a dispute should arise between several honorable
candidates for marriage, so that it may be doubtful to which one it would be
advantageous for the girl to be united, and she, through modesty, is unwilling
to express her preference in the presence of her relatives, the judge is
authorized to decide to which suitor it is best that she be married.
21. The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian to Bassus, Prse-torian Prefect.
We grant free permission to soldiers, from those of no military rank up to that
of protector, to contract marriage with freeborn women, without any of the
usual formalities.
22. The Same to Hierius, Prsetorian Prefect.
If the instruments relating to an ante-nuptial contract or a dowry are lacking,
and the ceremony and other formalities associated with marriage have been
omitted, let no one think that, on account of this neglect, marriage which has
otherwise been legally performed is not valid; or that on this account children
born of it can be deprived of their rights as legitimate; for among persons of
equal standing, whose union is not prevented by any law, matrimonial union will
take place by their own consent and the testimony of their friends.1
Given at Constantinople, on the tenth of the Kalendsof March, during the
Consulate of Felix and Taurus, 428.
23. The Emperor Justinian to Demosthenes, Prsetorian Prefect.
Believing that it is a peculiar duty of Imperial beneficence at all times not
only to consider the convenience of Our subjects, but also to attempt to supply
their needs, We have determined that the errors of women on account of which,
through the weakness of their sex, they have chosen to be guilty of
dishonorable conduct, should be corrected by a display of proper moderation,
and that they should by no means be deprived of the hope of an improvement of
status, so that, taking this into consideration, they may the more readily
abandon the improvident and disgraceful choice of life which they have made.
For We believe that the benevolence of God, and His exceeding clemency towards
the human race, should be imitated by Us (as far as Our nature will permit),
who is always willing to pardon the sins daily committed by man, accept Our
repentance, and bring us to a better condition. Hence, We should seem to be
unworthy of pardon Ourselves were We to fail to act in this manner with
reference to those subject to Our empire.
(1) Therefore, as it would be unjust for slaves, to whom their liberty has been
given, to be raised by Imperial indulgence to the status of men who are born
free, and, by the effect of an Imperial privilege of this kind, be placed in
the same position as if they had
1 "Consensus non concubitus facit matrimonium."---ED.
never been slaves, but were freeborn; and that women who had devoted themselves
to theatrical performances, and, afterwards having become disgusted with this
degraded status, abandoned their infamous occupation and obtained better
repute, should have no hope of obtaining any benefit from the Emperor, who had
the power to place them in the condition in which they could have remained, if
they had never been guilty of dishonorable acts, We, by the present most
merciful law, grant them this Imperial benefit under the condition that where,
having deserted their evil and disgraceful condition, they embrace a more
proper life, and conduct themselves honorably, they shall be permitted to
petition Us to grant them Our Divine permission to contract legal marriage when
they are unquestionably worthy of it. Those who may be united with them need be
under no apprehension, nor think that such marriages are void by the provisions
of former laws; but, on the other hand, they shall remain valid, and be
considered just as if the women had never previously led dishonorable lives,
whether their husbands are invested with office, or, for some other reason, are
prohibited from marrying women of the stage, provided, however, that the
marriage can be proved by dotal contracts reduced to writing. For women of this
kind having been purified from all blemishes, and, as it were, restored to the
condition in which they were born, We desire that no disgraceful epithet be
applied to them, and that no difference shall exist between them and those who
have never committed a similar breach of morality.
(2) Children born of a marriage of this kind shall be legitimate, and the
proper heirs of their father, even though he may have other lawful heirs by a
former marriage; so that such children may also, without any obstacle, be able
to acquire the estates of their parents, either ab intestato,or under the terms
of a will.
(3) If, however, women of this description, after an Imperial Rescript has been
granted them in accordance with their request, should defer contracting
marriage, We order that their. reputations shall, nevertheless, remain intact,
as in the case of all others who may desire to transfer their property to
anyone; and that they shall be competent to receive anything bequeathed to
them, in accordance with law, or an estate which may descend to them on the
ground of intestacy.
Extract from Novel 51. Latin Text.
These privileges shall be granted them, even if they may have sworn that they
will continue in their former profession, because it is expressly stated by the
laws that an oath to perform an unlawful act must not be observed, and that the
penalty for perjury, if any exists, shall be inflicted upon him who exacts an
oath of this description.
END OF THE EXTRACT.
THE TEXT OP THF CODE FOLLOWS.
(4) We also decree that such of these women as have obtained a privilege from
the Emperor shall occupy the same position as those
who have obtained some other benefit which was not bestowed by the sovereign,
but was acquired by them as a voluntary donation before their marriage; for, by
a concession of this kind, every other stigma on account of which women are
forbidden to contract lawful marriage with certain men is absolutely removed.
(5) To this We add that when the daughters of women of this kind are born after
the purification of their mother from the disgrace of her former life, they
shall not be considered as the children of females belonging to the stage, or
be subject to the laws which forbid certain men to marry such women. Where,
however, they were born before that time, they shall be permitted to petition
the Emperor for a Rescript, which should be granted without any opposition, by
means of which they may be permitted to marry, just as if they were not the
daughters of actresses; and those men shall not be prohibited from marrying
them who are forbidden to take as wives girls belonging to the stage, either on
account of their own rank, or for some other reason; provided, however, that in
every instance, dotal instruments in writing are executed by the parties
concerned.
(6) If, however, a girl born of a theatrical mother, who practiced her
profession until the time of her death, should, after her mother's decease,
petition for Imperial indulgence, and obtain it, she shall be freed from the
blemish of her mother's reputation, and herself be granted permission to marry;
and she also can without the fear of former laws be united in matrimony with
those who not long ago were prohibited from marrying the daughter of an
actress.
(7) Moreover, We have thought that what was prescribed by former laws (although
this was somewhat obscure) should be abolished, namely, that a marriage
contracted between persons of unequal rank shall not be considered valid,
unless dotal instruments with reference to it were executed. When, however,
this does not take place, such marriages shall still be absolutely valid,
without any distinction of persons, provided the women are free and freeborn,
and that no suspicion of any criminal or incestuous union arises, for We, under
all circumstances, annul criminal and incestuous unions, as well as those which
were especially prohibited by the provisions of former laws; with the
exception, however, of such as We authorize by the present decree, and direct
shall be considered legal, in accordance with the rights of marriage.1
Extract from Novel 117, Chapter IV. Latin Text.
Those who are invested with exalted dignity, up to persons styled illustrious,
cannot legally contract matrimony, unless dotal instruments have been drawn up
in writing, although marriages previously contracted will stand. Barbarians are
excepted from this rule, but all others can legally marry under the inducement
of affection alone.
1 These laws were unquestionably promulgated in a vain attempt to render the
Empress Theodora, who had been an actress, and whose vices had been the scandal
of the Empire, respectable._ED.
THE TEXT OF THE CODE FOLLOWS.
(8) Therefore these matters having been settled in this manner, by this general
law which must hereafter be observed, We order that any such unions which have
subsequently been made shall be regulated in accordance with the aforesaid
provisions; so that where anyone has married a wife of this kind during Our
reign (as has already been stated), and has children by her, they shall be
legitimate, and be entitled to succeed to their father ab intestato,as well as
under a will, and the wife, as well as any children hereafter born of her,
shall also be considered legitimate.
24. The Same to the Senate.
We order that if anyone should, in any agreement whatsoever, whether it is
drawn up for the purpose of giving something, or for the performance of some
act, or for not giving anything, or for the non-performance of some act, either
refer to the time of his marriage or merely mention the marriage itself, the
condition of the contract shall not be understood to have been complied with,
or not to have been dispensed with, unless the ceremony of marriage actually
takes place; and that the age at which marriage can be solemnized, which in the
case of a female is after she has completed her twelfth year, and in case of a
male after he has completed his fourteenth year, should not be considered, but
the time when the marriage was performed shall only be taken into account; for
in this way all disputes arising from the ancient law are disposed of, and the
immense number of volumes on this subject are reduced to very few.
25. The Same to Julian, Prsetorian Prefect.
The question was discussed by the ancients whether the children of insane
parents, under whose control they were, could marry. Almost all the legal
authorities admitted that the daughter of an insane person could marry, for
they thought it was sufficient if the father did not object, but it was doubted
whether a son could do so. Ulpian refers to a Constitution of the Emperor
Marcus, which does not mention lunatics, but in general terms alludes to
children of persons of weak minds, whether they are males or females, who
contract marriage; and he states that they can do so without applying to the
Emperor.
Another doubt arises from this constitution, that is to say, whether what it
provides, with reference to persons of weak minds, should also apply to those
who are insane; and whether the children of lunatics are also entitled to
relief, just as those of a person of feeble intellect. Therefore, for the
purpose of disposing of these doubts and difficulties, We order that whatever
appears to be lacking in the Constitution of the Divine Marcus shall be
supplied by the following provision, that is to say, that not only the children
of a person of weak intellect, but also those of one who is insane, of either
sex, can legally contract marriage; and that the dowry, as well as the ante-
nuptial donation, shall be furnished by their curators. The amount of the
dowry, as well as that of the ante-nuptial donation, must, in this Imperial
City,
be determined by the estimate of the most excellent Urban Prefect, and in the
provinces by that of the illustrious Governors, or by the bishops of the
various dioceses; and the curator of the person who has lost his mind or has
become insane should be present, as well as those highest in rank in their
families, so that nothing may arise in a case of this kind, either in this
Imperial City, or in the provinces, to cause any loss of the property of said
insane person, or of him of enfeebled intellect; and these proceedings shall be
undertaken gratuitously, so that a human misfortune of this description may not
be aggravated by any expense.
26. The Same to Julian, Prsetorian Prefect.
If anyone should grant freedom to his foster-daughter, and marry her, a doubt
arose among the ancients whether a marriage of this kind should be considered
lawful or not. Therefore We, desiring to resolve this long-existing doubt,
decree that such a marriage is not prohibited, for if these marriages have
their origin in affection, and We find nothing impious or contrary to law in
such a union, why should We think that they ought not to be allowed? No man can
be found who is so wicked as to afterwards marry a girl whom, in the first
place, he treated as his daughter; but it should be believed that he did not
originally bring her up as his daughter, but gave her her freedom, and
afterwards deemed her worthy to be married to him. A woman should, by all
means, be prevented from marrying her godfather who received her in baptism
whether she is his foster-child or not, as nothing else can be so productive of
paternal affection and just prohibition of marriage as a tie of this kind, by
means of which, through the mediation of God, the souls of the parties in
question are united.
27. The Same to John, Prsetorian Prefect.
We order that marriages which take place between men and women who are more or
less than fifty or sixty years of age, and which are prohibited by the Lex
Julia et Papia,cannot be prevented in any way, or on either side, where the men
consent.
28. The Same to John, Prsetorian Prefect.
Where a man has a wife who is a freedwoman, and afterwards becomes illustrious
by being raised to the dignity of Senator, the question is raised by Ulpian
whether the marriage is dissolved by his promotion, because the Lex Papiadoes
not permit marriages to exist between senators and freedwomen. Hence We,
following the judgment of God, do not permit that, in one and the same
marriage, the happiness of the husband should become the misfortune of his
wife, so that his wife may be debased to the extent that he is elevated, and
indeed that she should absolutely be lost to him; therefore, as severity of
this kind ought not to exist in our times, and the marriage should stand, and
the wife rise with her husband and share his distinction, the marriage shall
remain valid, and shall be, to no extent, affected by an occurrence of this
description.
In like manner, where the daughter of a private person marries a freedman, and
her father is afterwards raised to the senatorial dignity, the cruel provision
of the Papian Law is silent on this point, and the marriage celebrated between
the daughter of one who has become a senator and a freedman must not be
dissolved on this account, so that the prosperity of the father-in-law may not
be attained without the loss of his son-in-law; for it is better that the
harshness of the Papian Law should be mitigated in both instances, rather than,
by observing it, the marriages of men should be annulled, not on account of any
vice of the wife or the husband, but because of the good fortune of both, for,
as this defect proceeds from one source, the result is that it is removed by
one law.



* TITLE V.
CONCERNING MARRIAGES WHICH ARE INCESTUOUS AND VOID.

1. The Emperor Alexander to Amphigonus.
If your freedwoman, who is also your wife, leaves you without your consent, she
cannot marry another if you desire to retain her as your wife.

2. The Emperors DiocletioM and Maximum to Sebastiana.
It is a matter of common notoriety that no one who is subject to the
jurisdiction of the Roman Empfre can have two wives at once; as, by the Edict
of the Praetor, men of this description are branded with infamy, and a
competent judge will not suffer a crime of this kind to go unpunished.

3. The Emperor Constantine to Patroclus.
Marriage to a female slave cannot exist, for only slaves are born of an union
of this kind. Therefore, We order that decurions, induced by licentious desires
for female slaves, shall not resort to the houses of powerful men; and if a
decurion, without the knowledge of the stewards or superintendents of the same,
shall be found living with the female slave of another, We order that the woman
shall be sentenced by the judge to the mines, and the decurion himself shall be
deported to an island; and if he has been freed from the control of his father,
and has neither children, parents, nor any near relatives who can be called to
his succession as heirs at law, his property shall be confiscated for the
benefit of the city in which he held the office of decurion. If, however, the
stewards or superintendents of the house in which the offence was committed
were aware of it, or, after it had been discovered, were unwilling to make it
known, it is proper that they also should be sentenced to the mines.
If the owner of the house permitted this to be done, or, after having heard of
it, concealed it, and the act was committed in the country, the land, together
with the slaves and the cattle, as well as
all other property requisite for agriculture, shall be confiscated to the
Treasury. If, however, the act was committed in a city, We order that half of
all the property shall be confiscated by way of increasing the penalty, because
the offence, having been perpetrated in the owner's residence, he was unwilling
to disclose it as soon as it became known to him.

4. The Emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius to Andro-macus, Count of
Private Affairs.
When anyone marries contrary to the provisions of the laws, or in violation of
the Mandates and Constitutions of the Emperors, nothing shall be acquired
through such a marriage, whether an antenuptial donation of any kind was given
before or afterwards. We order that everything which was bestowed by the
liberality of one of the parties upon the other shall be taken from him or her,
as being unworthy of having it, and confiscated to the Treasury; there being
excepted from this rule such men and women as, through some serious mistake,
which was neither affected nor simulated, have been deceived for any good
cause, or have erred on account of their youth. It has, however, been decided
that they alone shall be free from the restraints of Our law who, having
discovered their error, or having arrived at their majority, take steps to
dissolve an union of this description without delay.

5. The Same to Cynegius.
We absolutely prohibit marriage with the wife of a brother, or with two
sisters, even where a previous marriage has been dissolved in any way
whatsoever.

6. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Eutychianus, Prss-torian Prefect.
If anyone should pollute himself by an incestuous or prohibited marriage, he
can retain possession of his own property as long as he lives, but he must not
think that he has a wife, or any children by her, nor can he, during his
lifetime, donate anything to the aforesaid persons even through the
interposition of a third party; nor can he leave them any property at the time
of his death. If a dowry has been formally given or promised, it shall, in
compliance with the ancient laws, be confiscated to Our Treasury. He can
bequeath nothing to strangers by his will, but, whether he dies testate or
intestate, his heirs will succeed him by law, provided he has children born in
just and lawful wedlock; that is to say, if he has among his descendants a son,
a daughter, a grandson, a granddaughter, a great-grandson, or a great-
granddaughter; or among his ascendants, a father, a mother, a grandfather, or a
grandmother; or in the collateral line, a brother, a sister, a paternal uncle,
or a paternal aunt. He shall have a right to make a will, and leave what he
wishes only to such persons as he may select, and who, according to the tenor
of Our Imperial Rescript, are entitled to the succession.
Where any of the persons whom We have mentioned is shown to have advised the
contraction of the incestuous marriage, he shall be absolutely excluded from
the estate of the deceased, and the heir who is next in degree shall succeed in
his stead.
Moreover, what We have provided with reference to men shall also be observed
with regard to women who have polluted themselves with such marriages as those
above mentioned. When, however, the persons referred to as being next of kin
are not living, the estate shall be confiscated to Our Treasury.
Given at Constantinople, on the sixth of the Idesof December, during the
Consulate of Arcadius, Consul for the fourth time, and Honorius, Consul for the
third time, 396.

EXTRACT FROM NOVEL 12, Chapter I. Latin Text.

The penalty imposed upon anyone who contracts an incestuous marriage is the
confiscation of his property, including not only the dowry, but everything
else, exile, and the loss of rank (if he enjoys it), and also scourging when he
is of inferior degree; and any woman who commits a similar offence shall suffer
the same punishment. If the offender has legitimate children, who become their
own masters by the crime of their father, his property shall pass to them,
provided that he is supported by them, but if there are no children, it shall
be confiscated to the Treasury.

EXTRACT FROM NOVEL 89, Last Chapter.

Children should not be called natural who are born of an execrable, incestuous
or prohibited marriage, but should be considered as unworthy of inheriting
their father's estate, or of being supported by him.

7. The Emperors Valentinian and Martian to Palladius, Praetorian Prefect.
We do not understand a low or abject woman to be one who, although she may be
poor, is descended from freeborn parents. Therefore We have decided that
Senators and persons of the highest rank can marry women who are the children
of freeborn parents, even though they are poor; and that no distinction exists
between freeborn women and those who are more opulent, on account of the good
fortune of the latter. We only consider those women to be low and abject
persons who are slaves, the daughters of slaves, freedwomen, and the daughters
of freedwomen, actresses, and their daughters, the daughters of tavern-keepers,
of proprietors of houses of prostitution, and of gladiators; or women who make
their bodies articles of merchandise; therefore it is only proper for Us to
forbid the marriage of Senators with women belonging to the classes which We
have just enumerated.
Given at Constantinople, on the day before the Nonesof April, during the
Consulate of Jstius, and Asterius, 454.

8. The Emperor Zeno to Epinicus, Prsstorian Prefect.
Although certain Egyptians have married the wives of their deceased brothers,
for the reason that they were said to have remained virgins after their
marriage, being of the opinion that sexual intercourse had not taken place
between them (which has been held by certain legal authorities), and that, on
this account, no marriage was considered to have been actually consummated; and
while matrimonial unions of this description which took place under such
circumstances were valid, still, We order by the present law that, if any such
marriages should be celebrated, those who contract them, as well as their
children, shall be subject to the provisions of the ancient laws, and that the
marriages shall not, according to the example of the Egyptians above referred
to, be considered to be either valid, or capable of being rendered so.

9. The Emperor Anastasius to Severianus, Pr&torian Prefect.
All persons governed by Our Empire are notified that they must abstain from
incestuous marriages. For We decree that all rescripts, pragmatic sanctions, or
impious constitutions which, during the period of tyranny, permitted certain
persons to give the name of marriage to wicked unions, and allowed anyone to
marry his niece, his sister, or his sister-in-law, and to live in the basest
associations with her, or sanctioned any other unions of this kind, to be of no
force or effect, lest, by culpable dissimulation, such abominable license may
be confirmed.



* TITLE VI.
CONCERNING THE PROHIBITION OP MARRIAGE BETWEEN A FEMALE WARD AND HER
GUARDIAN OR CURATOR, OR HIS SON.

1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Marinus.
The authority of the Decree of the Senate, by which marriage between a female
ward and the son of her guardian is very properly forbidden, must not be evaded
under the pretext of ignorance and want of experience.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Byruus.
The mother of a female ward is not prohibited from contracting marriage with
the guardian of her daughter, or the son of her guardian.
3. The Same to Rogatianus.
As you allege that your father, at a time when you say that you were not under
his control, was appointed curator of the woman whom you married, after you had
had children by her, and as the marriage already solemnized cannot be vitiated
by a subsequent occurrence, you need have no apprehension that, under a just
interpretation of
the law, the children which you have will be considered not to have been
legitimately born. In order, however, that all doubt may be removed, your
father, as well as your wife, should insist that another curator be appointed
in his stead; for your wife will have the power to demand an account of his
administration from the person who was substituted for him.
4. The Emperor Philip to Higina.
There can be no doubt that a freedman who gave his female ward, the daughter of
his patron, in marriage to his natural son who was born in slavery and was
afterwards manumitted, is liable under the provisions of the Decree of the
Senate, which forbids marriages of this description.
5. The Emperor Philip, and the Csesar Philip, to Apuleius.
You have been falsely informed that a curator cannot marry his daughter to a
minor in his charge.
6. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to Lucius.
If you married your father's female ward before the account of the guardianship
was rendered, or even after it was rendered, but before she attained her
twenty-fifth year, or before the available year expired, you cannot be
considered to have contracted marriage with her, or to have had a child by such
an union. Where, however, the father of the girl requested that the marriage
should take place at the time of his death, and this was done in accordance
with law, the child will be considered legitimate.
7. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Ctesars, to Paragonius.
If a guardian or a curator should, without having obtained an Imperial Rescript
for that purpose, marry his ward or a minor in his charge either to himself or
to his son, he shall be branded with infamy as having confessed that he had
been guilty of mismanagement of the guardianship, because, by an union of this
kind, he had attempted to conceal fraud committed during his administration;
and hence any dowry which was given can be recovered by a personal action.
8. The Emperors Leo and Anthemius to Erythrius, Prsetorian Prefect.
If anyone, having fraudulently assumed the name of guardian or curator, that is
to say has, without proper authority, administered the affairs of a female
minor in the capacity of her guardian, curator, or agent, and has either
married her himself, or given her in marriage to his son, We decree that a
matrimonial alliance of this kind shall stand, and not be annulled like that of
an actual guardian; in order that where children are born of marriages
contracted in this designing or malignant manner, or dowries have been given or
promised on account of them, they may not be subjected to injury or annoyance.



* TITLE VII.
WHERE ANYONE CLOTHED WITH POWER, OR ANY OF His SUBORDINATES, ATTEMPTS
TO MARRY A FEMALE SUBJECT TO HIS JURISDICTION.

1. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Theodore, Prsetorian
Prefect.
When any person invested with ordinary power, or other authority, makes use of
it for the purpose of contracting marriage, if the woman herself, or her
parents are unwilling (whether she is a ward, a virgin living with her father,
or a widow who is her own mistress, no matter what position she may occupy),
and he is convicted of either employing or of having employed threats against
the persons who are unwilling, for the purpose of accomplishing his design, We
decree that he shall be liable to a fine of ten pounds of gold for having made
such an attempt, even though he may not have effected a marriage forbidden by
law; and, as he has forfeited his honor, We prohibit him from availing himself
of the dignity which he has acquired, and as he has made such bad use of his
office, if he refuses to obey Our laws, he shall, by way of penalty, be
forbidden by the judge to live for the term of two years in the province in
which he so exceeded his authority.
It is also added that, if he still retains his office, the person whom he
attempted to take advantage of by conduct of this kind shall be permitted to
bring a complaint immediately, and, with her household, decline to submit to
the jurisdiction of the magistrate concerned; and the execution of this law
shall devolve upon the defenders of every city, and the subordinate officials
of the court. And, indeed, if an ordinary judge is accused of an offence of
this kind, all the affairs of his household, as well as all the civil and
criminal business, shall be brought before his deputy, as long as the said
judge remains in office. Where, however, his deputy, or anyone else invested
with similar authority, has undertaken to employ violence in the contraction of
a marriage of this kind, the ordinary judge, on the other hand, shall interpose
his authority. But where both of them are liable to suspicion, the protection
of such households shall be especially undertaken by the illustrious
prefecture, as long as the aforesaid magistrates remain in office.
Given at Thessalonica, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof May, during the
Consulate of Gratian, Consul for the second time, and Theodosius, 380.



* TITLE VIII.
CONCERNING MARRIAGE DEMANDED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE TERMS OP A RESCRIPT.

1. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Theodore, Prsetorian Prefect.
Certain persons, in violation of the provisions of the ancient law, think that
they have a right to demand authority to contract a mar-
riage which they understand is forbidden, by means of a fraudulent request made
to Us; and they often pretend that they have obtained the consent of the girl.
For this reason We, by the present law, forbid all marriages of this
description. Hence, if anyone, by means of a fraudulent petition, obtains
permission to contract a marriage of this kind, contrary to the provisions of
this law, let him entertain no doubt that he will suffer the loss of his
property, and the penalty of deportation, and that the marriage which he has
made by such forbidden means having been annulled, he will not have any
legitimate children born of such an union, nor any pardon or indulgence, as the
rescript or-annotation will be considered void, except in those cases where the
marriage or the betrothal has been requested by the parents of the girl, or
where, in conformity with the provisions of the law, they demand that what has
been given as a betrothal pledge shall be returned, together with the
prescribed penalty.
Given on the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of Honorius, Consul for
the eighth time, and Theodosius, Consul for the third time, 409.
2. The Emperor Zeno to Basilius, Prsetorian Prefect.
We again absolutely forbid, under all circumstances, the abominable crime of
the marriage of an uncle and a niece, which has already been prohibited under
the severest penalties by the Imperial Constitutions. We also hereafter refuse
to all persons permission to ask for such a marriage (or rather for such a
contagion), in order that everyone may know that if he should fraudulently
obtain consent for what even the right of a petition is hereby denied, it will
be of no advantage to him.



* TITLE IX. CONCERNING SECOND MARRIAGES.
1. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Eutro-pius, Prsetorian
Prefect.
Any woman, who hastens to contract a second marriage without having properly
mourned for her first husband, becomes infamous by the effect of a well-known
law; and besides, she cannot give to her second husband by way of dowry more
than a third part of the property, nor can she leave him by her will more than
a third of her estate.
Moreover, she will not be entitled to any inheritances, legacies, or trusts
left to her by a last will, or by a donation mortis causa,for We order that all
these things shall be claimed by the heirs, the co-heirs, or successors ab
intestatoof the deceased, lest We may not seem to have in view the benefit of
the Treasury while We are attempting to correct this violation of morality. She
shall also lose whatever her husband left her by his last will, even though the
property bequeathed to her by her first husband may be without an owner, on
account of her premature marriage; and in the first place, We decree that it
shall descend to the ten persons enumerated in the Edict of the Praetor, that
is to say, to the ascendants and descendants, and next in the collateral line
as far as the second degree (the regular order of degrees being, of course,
observed), and then it shall be acquired by the Treasury. Again, We do not
permit such a woman, who has become infamous, to claim any estate on the ground
of intestacy, either by the civil or praetorian law, beyond the third degree.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of
Gratian and Theodosius, 380.
Extract from Novel 22, Chapter XL; and Novel 34, Chapter II. Latin Text.
A woman who brings forth a child within the time prescribed for mourning shall
be liable to the same penalty, provided there is no doubt that the said
offspring does not belong to the deceased, for she should also be deprived of
the usufruct of the ante-nuptial donation.
The same rule applies to a woman who, having accepted the guardianship of her
children, marries a second time, in violation of her oath, without having
previously applied for a guardian, rendered an account, and paid everything
that she owed. At present, however, by a subsequent law, the oath is not
exacted of her, but if she contracts a second marriage, she will be deprived of
the guardianship.
2. The Same to Eutropius, Praetorian Prefect.
Where a woman who has lost her husband hastens to marry another within the term
of a year (for We have added a short time to be observed after the ten months
formerly prescribed, although We think that the entire period is extremely
brief), she shall be branded with opprobrium, and be deprived of the rights and
honors due to persons of noble and distinguished rank, and shall lose
everything which she acquired from the estate of her first husband, either at
the time of betrothal, or by the last will of the deceased.
Given at Constantinople, on the third of the Kalendsof June, during the
Consulate of Eucherius and Syagrius, 381.
3. The Same to Theodore, Prtetorian Prefect.
Women who have had children by their first husbands, and marry a second time
after the prescribed term of mourning has elapsed, transmit intact to their
children all the property which they have received from their former husbands,
whether they obtained anything by marriage, by donations mortis causa,directly
by will, under a trust, by virtue of a legacy, or through any other evidence of
liberality from the estates of their first husbands (as has been previously
stated), and they can transmit it to any one of their children (provided the
latter is one of those whom We have decided to be entitled to such a
succession), and whom the mother may, in consideration of its merits, consider
worthy of her bounty.
Such women shall not presume to alienate property of this description to any
stranger, or to a child born of the second marriage, and they shall have only
the right of the possession and enjoyment of such
property during their lives, but the authority to alienate it is not granted
them. For, if any of such property should be transferred by a woman of this
kind to any person whomsoever, it shall be restored out of her own estate, in
order that it may come unimpaired and intact into the hands of those children
who We have decided are entitled to it.
(1) We also add to this law, that if any of the children who are proved to have
been born of the former marriage should die after the mother has disgraced
herself by a second one, all the surviving offspring of the same marriage shall
have a right to whatever the mother would be considered entitled to ab
intestato,or under the will of her child by the same succession; and she shall
only have possession of the share due to her for the term of her life, and must
leave everything to the surviving children of the former marriage; nor shall
she have power to bequeath property of this kind to any stranger whomsoever, or
to alienate any of the same.
If she should not have had issue by her first marriage, or her child or
children should die, she is hereby fully authorized to dispose of everything
which she has acquired in any way, and shall be legally entitled to complete
ownership of the same, and can leave it by will to anyone whom she may select.
Given at Constantinople, on the sixth of the Kalendsof June, during the
Consulate of Antoninus and Syagrius, 382.
Extract from Novel 22, Chapter XXIII. Latin Text.
A woman shall not be entitled to the ownership of property included in a
donation made on account of marriage, even if another person gave it for the
benefit of her husband.
Extract from Novel 22, Chapter XXV. Latin Text.This profit is equally divided
among the children by law and its distribution is not left to the discretion of
the parent.
Extract from Novel 22, Chapter XLVI; and Novel 2, Chapter III. Latin Text.
 --- A woman who has hastened to contract a second marriage succeeds to her
children under the terms of their wills, just as any other person who was
appointed heir. She also is called to an intestate succession, whether she
married the second time before the death of her child, or afterwards. In case
of an intestate succession, however, she will only receive the usufruct of such
property as came into the hands of the child from his father's estate. The same
rule applies to antenuptial donations, as to other property, but the
ingratitude of the mother and the brothers should, in this instance also, by
all means be taken into consideration.
Extract from Novel 2, Chapter II; and Novel 22, Chapter XXVI. Latin Text.
If, however, any one of them should die first without issue, the ownership of a
part of the property left will go to the mother, in
accordance with the agreement made in case there should be no children, and the
remainder will pass to the heirs of the deceased, whoever they may be;
therefore, if she should dispose of any of said property, the sale will be
valid so far as the portion above mentioned is concerned. But when the mother
is the only heir, she herself will be entitled to the entire estate, and she
can follow any alienation of it that she pleases.
4. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Marinus, Prsetorian Prefect.
While We have previously ordered by other laws that the estate of the mother
shall descend intact to the children, still, where she has acquired any
property through the generosity of her husband, the children born of the first
marriage are informed that they have a right to make a special claim to it, as
constituting part of their father's estate. Therefore, if a woman who had
children should contract a second marriage, only the issue of said second
marriage shall have a right to the possession of all the property which the
second husband gave to his wife at the time of their betrothal; and it will be
of no advantage to those by the former marriage that the woman did not marry a
third time.
If, however, the second husband should die without leaving any children,
whatever his wife obtained from him as a betrothal gift shall belong to her by
law, even if the donor is shown to have left children by a former marriage. So
far as the estate of the mother is concerned, any offspring which she may
leave, no matter from what husband the property was obtained, or whether it was
derived from this or from some other source, shall have the share to which they
are entitled from their mother's estate, whether it became theirs by gift, or
under the terms of a will. For We decree that it is expressly provided by this
law, that children, no matter of what marriage they are born, shall be entitled
to any property donated by their father at the time of his betrothal.
Given at Ravenna, on the third of the Nonesof November, during the Consulate of
Honorius, Consul for the thirteenth time, and Theodosius, Consul for the tenth
time, 422.
5. The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian to Florentius, Prsetorian Prefect.
Generally speaking, We decree that, in every instance where, before the
promulgation of this law, the constitutions direct that a woman shall preserve
for the benefit of their common children all the property which came into her
hands from the estate of her husband where the marraige was dissolved by death
this shall be done; and also, under the same circumstances, that the husband
shall preserve for the common children everything which came into his hands
from the estate of his wife, where the marriage was terminated by the death of
the latter. It makes no difference whether someone else made an ante-nuptial
donation for the benefit of the husband, or gave a dowry for the benefit of the
wife.
We order that this rule shall be observed, even though the property included in
the ante-nuptial donation (as is usually the case), was given by the wife by
way of dowry. We decree, moreover, that the ownership of the property preserved
for the children by the provisions of this law, or by those of former
constitutions, shall belong to them. Therefore, where the person who was
keeping the said property for the children dies, all surviving children shall
have a right to recover it from any possessor whomsoever, and if it has been
consumed, can exact its value from the heirs of him who had the right to
preserve it. The right to alienate or encumber property which should be
preserved, or which has been ordered to be kept for their benefit, is not
permitted. We, however, grant to the father the right to administer the
business of his children in a proper manner; nor do We deny to the parents
permission to divide their property between their children according to their
own judgment, or even to select any one of them whom they may prefer.
(1) Still, in those instances in which the mother is directed to preserve the
property for the common children, because it belonged to their father, that is
to say, where the marriage has been dissolved by the death of the husband, and
the woman marries a second time; or where We order that the father shall
preserve the property of the mother for the benefit of their common offspring,
when the marriage has been dissolved by the death of the wife, and the husband
marries again; if the children should not enter upon the estate of their
father, who died first, they shall only be permitted to claim for themselves
the property of the parent who died last; that is, if they should decide to
accept the estate of the one who died last, in order that what was established
for the benefit of the said children may not, in certain cases, appear to have
been devised for their injury.
Extract from Novel 23, Chapter XXIII, XVI. Latin Text.
Any profit obtained during marriage belongs to the children, although they may
not be heirs of their father or mother, or of both of them; unless they have
been ungrateful, and their ingratitude is
proved.
END OF THE EXTRACT.
THE TEXT OP THE CODE FOLLOWS.
(2) We have thought that, for the sake of humanity, the following should be
inserted in this law, that is to say, in every instance in which profit is
obtained, where property comes into the hands of the wife from the husband, or
the husband obtains anything from the estate of his wife when the first
marriage is dissolved by the death of one of the parties, and the survivor does
not marry again; and if the husband of the wife, that is to say, the survivor,
does not consume or alienate the property (which there is no doubt belongs to
them as owners when they do not contract a second marriage), the children are
entitled to the property which formed part of their father's estate, as well as
to that derived from the estate of their mother.
Extract from Novel 98, Chapter I. Latin Text.
When the wife dies, the profits that the husband obtained from the dowry, the
usufruct of which is granted to him, are absolutely reserved for the common
children, so far as their ownership is concerned.
The same rule applies to the share of the woman, if she has profited to any
extent by the betrothal gift. Likewise, where the marriage is dissolved in any
other manner, these profits are disposed of by the same constitution.
Extract from Novel 127, Chapter III. Latin Text.
If, however, the mother should not marry a second time, she herself will be
entitled to a share of the property, in proportion to the number of her
children. This rule also applies to the father and all relatives in the
ascending line, who do not contract a second marriage.
6. The Emperors Leo and Anthemius to Erythrius, Prsetorian Prefect.
We order by this published law, which shall be valid for all time, that where
there are any children by a former marriage, and either the father or the
mother contracts matrimonial vows a second or a third time, or more, it shall
not be permitted to leave to the stepmother or stepfather, either by a will
written or unwritten, or by a codicil, or by the right of inheritance, or by
virtue of a legacy or a trust, or by way of dowry or ante-nuptial donations, or
by a donation mortis causaor one inter vivos(although these last donations are
forbidden by the Civil Law to be made during marriage, still they are, for
certain reasons, usually confirmed, after the death of the donor), more than
they could have left or given to a son or daughter, if either one of them were
living. Where, however, there are several children, they will all be entitled
to equal shares, and no more can be acquired by any one of them than is
permitted to be given to their stepfather or their stepmother. When, however,
the above-mentioned property was not transmitted in equal shares to the said
children, then it shall not be lawful to leave to the stepmother or stepfather
by will, or to donate by way of dowry or as an ante-nuptial donation, any more
than a son or a daughter would be entitled to, to whom a smaller share of the
estate was left or given by the last will of the testator; provided, that the
fourth part due to the said children under the law cannot, in any way, be
diminished, unless for those reasons which prevent the complaint of
inofficiousness.
We decree that this rule shall also apply to the grandfather or the
grandmother, the great-grandfather, and the great-grandmother, as well as to
the grandchildren and great-grandchildren of both sexes; in either the paternal
or maternal line of descent whether they are under paternal control, or have
been emancipated or not.
If, however, any property in excess of what has been prescribed by law should
be left to the stepmother or the stepfather, or donated or presented to either
of them, the surplus shall be considered as not having been referred to, left,
donated, or given; and We order that it shall belong to the children, and be
divided among them; for the
purpose of avoiding every evasion of the law which may be attempted, either by
the interposition of a third person, or in any other manner whatsoever.
(1) We add to these provisions that a woman, in those instances in which ante-
nuptial donations or other property has come to her from her husband, shall be
compelled to preserve the same for their common children, as constituting part
of their father's estate, in accordance with the terms of former laws; that is
to say, when, after the marriage has been dissolved by the death of the
husband, she contracts another, she can only enjoy the usufruct of the movable
property and the slaves, as well as the civil allowance of support, during her
lifetime; all alienation of the same being absolutely prohibited. With
reference to the movable property, however, she shall, in like manner, be
entitled to its usufruct, after a just appraisement has been made by arbiters
chosen with the consent of all parties, and after an oath has been administered
; provided she furnishes good security that she will restore the said property
or the value of the same to the sons or daughters who are the issue of this
marriage; or, after their death, to all her grandsons and granddaughters
descended from the said children, or to any one of them who may happen to
survive; and that she will do this in accordance with the laws. But if she
should fail, or be unwilling to furnish proper security, the aforesaid property
shall remain in the hands of the children, if it has not yet been transferred
by them to their mother; and where it has been delivered to her, or is retained
by her, it shall be returned to the children. If proper security is offered by
them to their mother, by which it is agreed to pay her annually three per cent
on the estimated value of said property, instead of the usufruct or the sum at
which it was appraised; the children must not fail at any time to make said
payments.
It should also be provided by the bond that (if all the said children or their
descendants should happen to die before their mother) the above-mentioned
movable property shall be restored to her in accordance with the distribution
prescribed by law in order that she may have the benefit of the profit derived
from misfortune. Hence, if anyone of those who has furnished security should
consider it advantageous for himself, he shall be permitted to use and enjoy
the said movable property, and either to lend, encumber, or sell the same; in
order that the children may, by means of what is acquired by them, be enabled
to provide for their mother, without suffering any inconvenience themselves.
But if either of them should neglect, or be unable to furnish the security
aforesaid, the property shall remain in the hands of the woman during her
lifetime.
Extract from Novel 22, Chapters IV and XLV. Latin Text.
If a quantity of gold was mentioned in the donation made in consideration of
marriage, the contract must state that the interest on the same shall be paid,
but the gold itself cannot be exacted, unless it, as well as the other property
mentioned in the donation, was included in the estate of the husband.

EENNDD OOFF TTHHEE EEXXTTRRAACCTT..
THE TEXT OF THE CODE FOLLOWS.

(2) All the property which the woman received from her husband, as well as what
she herself has, or will be entitled to, is encumbered to the children who were
the issue of her first marriage, just as if it had been pledged or hypothecated
to guarantee the ante-nuptial donation or any other property which may have
come into her hands as part of the estate of her husband, from the very day
when she obtained possession of the same; so that if anyone should make a
contract with the woman after the said property was delivered to, or retained
by her, and she marries a second time, there is no doubt that, when it is
claimed, the children born of the first marriage, and any grandsons or
granddaughters descended from them, will be preferred to those born of the
second marriage.
(3) When, however, retaining parental affection for their children, either the
father or the mother is unwilling to contract a second marriage, the husband
shall not be prohibited from using according to his wishes, or selling, or
alienating in any way whatsoever, or pledging or hypothecating (if he or she
should wish to do so) as owner of the same, any property which belonged to the
estate of his wife, or the latter what belonged to that of her husband, and
which may have come into the possession of either.
The children shall be permitted to recover any of said property, if it has not
been alienated, consumed, or pledged; even though they may not have accepted
the estates of their parents.
Given on the second of the Kalends of March,during the Consulate of Martian and
Zeno, 469.
7. The Emperor Zeno to Sebastian, Prsetorian Prefect.
In some cases, the father, in others, the mother, is required to preserve an
ante-nuptial donation, or property which is derived from some other source for
the children of both sexes. If one of the sons or daughters should happen to
predecease the father or the mother (either before one of them has contracted a
second marriage, or afterwards) and leaves a son or a daughter, a grandson or a
granddaughter, or several of them, during the lifetime of his or her father or
mother, We decree that the share to which the deceased son or daughter was
entitled, or any profit derived therefrom, shall not pass to the brothers or
sisters of the deceased, but to their sons and daughters, or grandchildren of
both sexes; or to their great-grandchildren; or to their grandparents or great-
grandparents, if they are living; and that they shall not be prevented from
selecting such of their surviving children as they may desire to favor.
Given on the Kalendsof March, during the fifth Consulate of Ellus, 478.
8. The Emperor Justinian to Menna, Prxtorian Prefect.
If any of the children by a former marriage should die before the father or the
mother marries again, leaving either children, grandchildren, or great-
grandchildren, We decree that the share of the deceased
shall not go to his brothers or sisters, or, if he should have none, to his
father or mother, but to his own children, grandchildren, and great-
grandchildren, and, whether there be one or more, they can only claim the share
of the estate to which the defunct was entitled.
(1) We have determined to prescribe by a positive law that, where anyone having
children by a first marriage does not marry a second time, either of his
parents shall, in the same manner, be permitted to alienate or administer
property obtained by the former marriage in any way that he or she may desire.
If, however, none of this property has been alienated, the children shall have
a right to claim it, even if they do not accept the estate of their father or
mother.,
(2) We order that any alienation of property of this kind, which has been made
by the will of either the father or mother, or which has been either generally
or specially bequeathed at the time of the appointment of the heir, shall be
considered valid.
Extract from Novel 22, Chapter XX. Latin Text.
Now, however, profits of this kind are presumed to have been reserved for the
benefit of the children, unless they have been expressly transferred to others.
END OP THE EXTRACT.
THE TEXT OP THE CODE FOLLOWS.
(3) Permission is granted to children to claim any profits derived from the
marriage, even if they do not enter upon the estate of their father or mother,
where neither of their said parents contracted a second marriage, and did not
alienate the property acquired by them; but We by no means permit them to
demand for themselves any such property, if they have acquired any part of
their father's or mother's estates, when the deceased parent has any other
children by a former marriage.
(4) In order to confirm the ancient law We order, as in the case of a mother
whose property, after a second marriage, is held to be hypothecated to the
children by the first one, for the purpose of preserving the profits to which
they are entitled, that also the property of the father, which he either has,
or may hereafter acquire, and which, after a second marriage, must be preserved
by him for the benefit of children by a former one, if he obtained it from
their mother, shall also be considered as hypothecated.
We decree that the property of the said father, who has one or more children of
this kind under his control, shall be encumbered to that of the mother for the
benefit of the said children, and that its preservation shall be compulsory if
it comes to them from the maternal line of descent; nevertheless, the children
must not scrutinize the administration of their father or their mother too
closely, under the pretext of such an hypothecation; nor should they seek to
raise any question on this point, as it is a clear rule of law that if any
property not included in that above mentioned, or which forms part of their
mother's estate, should be alienated, the right of hypothecation will remain
unimpaired, so far as the said children are concerned.
Given on the third of the Idesof December, during the Consulate of Our Lord
Justinian, Consul for the second time, 528.
9. The Same to Menna, Praetorian Prefect.
As laws previously enacted have settled that everything which a wife or a
husband, having children by a former marriage, has given or bequeathed after a
second one, either by way of donation or in any other manner, to a larger
amount than should be donated or left to a single son or daughter, the issue of
a former marriage, should be revoked for the benefit of the sons and daughters
alone who are the children by the said former marriage; and, as in this
Section, no reference was made to children who are the issue of the second
marriage, We, for the purpose of correcting this omission, do hereby decree
that everything which is revoked, as aforesaid, shall not only go to the
children of the first marriage, but also to those who are the issue of the
second, and shall be equally distributed among all of them.
(1) In addition to this, We direct that any profits obtained by either the wife
or the husband through a dowry or an ante-nuptial donation, shall be subject to
the same rule, in case of repudiation, and after the second marriage of either
of the parties, shall be preserved indiscriminately for the benefit of the
children who are the issue of the former marriage, just as in the case of
divorce or death; nor can any attempt be made to call the divorce in question,
or to institute any other inquiry concerning the matter.
Given at Constantinople, on the Idesof April, during the Consulate of Decius,
Consul for the fifth time, 486.
Extract from Novel 22, Chapters I, XIX, XXVII. Latin Text.
Children by a first marriage are now alone entitled to this benefit, and if any
one of them should die, leaving issue, his share shall pass to them.
10. The Same to Demosthenes, Prsetorian Prefect.
It has been clearly provided by law that ungrateful children should with reason
be excluded from the inheritances of their ancestors, where the latter have
mentioned this in their wills, and it has actually been shown that the Divine
Constitution of the Emperor Leo, of illustrious memory, which was promulgated
with reference to children who were the issue of a former marriage, seems to
contradict a provision of this kind. For, as either the father or mother, who
contracted a second marriage, is required, for any reason whatsoever, to give
to the second husband, or stepmother, only as much as he or she could leave to
that son or daughter, the issue of the former marriage, who was entitled to the
smallest share of the estate, the greatest injustice to parents was caused by
this law; for, in every instance, children, being aware that their parents
could, even against their will, be prevented from leaving them only as much as
the second
husband or the stepmother was entitled to receive, injured their parents by all
kinds of dissipation and excesses. Therefore, We decree that any children who
are actually ungrateful shall not hereafter have any right to enjoy the benefit
conferred upon them by the Divine Constitution of the August Leo, but shall be
excluded as unworthy from every privilege of this description.
We also decree that this provision shall be observed with reference to
grandfathers and grandmothers, great-grandfathers and great-grandmothers,
grandsons and granddaughters, as well as great-grandsons and great-
granddaughters, whether they are under paternal control, or have been
emancipated, and whether they are in the paternal or maternal line of descent.
But as We provide for the protection of the parents, so also, We do not suffer
their innocent posterity to be subjected to injury, nor permit their parents,
who have contracted a second marriage, and perhaps may entertain an
unreasonable hatred of their children, to stigmatize them as ungrateful,
without good reason. Hence We desire that children shall be excluded from this
privilege who, through the efforts of the heirs of their parents, have been
convicted by clear and undoubted evidence of being ungrateful toward the
latter, in those instances which have been enumerated in former laws.
Given at Chalcedon, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof October, during the
Consulate of Decius, Consul for the fifth time, 486.



* TITLE X.
WHERE A WOMAN, TO WHOM HER HUSBAND LEFT AN USUFRUCT, MARRIES A SECOND TIME.
1. The Emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius to Tatian, Prsetorian
Prefect.
When a husband, at his death, leaves his wife the usufruct of his property, and
she contracts a second marriage, she shall lose the usufruct which she obtained
from her first husband, and must surrender it to her children by him, from the
day on which she married a second time. If, however, the children by the first
marriage should still be in the weakness of infancy, and she does not give them
the assistance of a guardian, but seizes an opportunity of this kind to
appropriate the property which was left to them, all of it can be recovered by
law, and she must surrender it with its profits, after having deducted the
necessary expenses.
This applies to the usufruct which a man, when making his last will, bequeathed
out of his own property for the benefit of his wife. We, however, decree that
where the usufruct of ante-nuptial donations is concerned, the rules
established by previous constitutions shall be
observed.
Given on the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Arcadius, Consul for the
second time, and Rufinus, 392.
Extract from Novel 22, Chapter XXXII. Latin Text.
This law applies where the usufruct is given or left under the condition that
it shall be extinguished in case of a second marriage; otherwise, it will
remain in full force, provided it has been left or donated under circumstances
which render it legal. An usufruct given as a dowry or an ante-nuptial
donation, which is authorized by law, cannot be revoked by a testator.



* TITLE XI. CONCERNING THE PROMISE OP A DOWRY, AND ONE MADE WITHOUT CONSIDERATION.

1. The Emperor Alexander to Claudius.
You are wrong in your opinion that you are entitled to an action to recover a
dowry which has been promised, but not delivered to you, as no specific
property or sum was agreed upon, and it was only stated in the nuptial contract
that the woman who was married promised to give a dowry.

2. The Emperor Gordian to Herodotus, Prsetorian Prefect.
If your father-in-law contracted to pay interest on the dowry which he promised
you, a competent judge will order you to be given what you prove is due to you.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of Pius
and Pontianus, 239.

3. The Same to Claudius.
If the person whom you mentioned promised legally to give you a dowry for the
woman who marries you, without mentioning the amount, but stating that it would
be whatever he himself might decide upon, and he does not comply with the terms
of the stipulation, you, having availed yourself of the proper action, can
obtain by a judgment what was promised you, for it is considered that a sum
which would be approved by a good citizen was included in the stipulation.
Given on the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of Sabinus and Venustus,
241.

4. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Cassars, to Rufus.
If you stated in the dotal contract with the consent of the person who gave the
dowry that more was given than you received, you are informed that you can, in
accordance with the agreement, recover whatever is lacking.
Given on the Nonesof April, during the above-mentioned Consulate.

5. The Same Emperors and Cassars to Desumiana.
If your father promised a dowry to your husband who entered into the
stipulation, an action to recover it will not lie in your favor, but in favor
of your husband, against the heirs of his father-in-law.

6. The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian to Hierius, Prsetorian Prefect.
We decree that any words whatsoever will be sufficient for the exaction of a
dowry after it has once been agreed to be given, whether they have been reduced
to writing or not; and even if the stipulation did not follow the promise of
the dotal property.
Given on the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Felix and Taurus, 428.

7. The Emperor Justinian to John, Prsetorian Prefect.
If a father should simply give a dowry to his daughter, or should make an ante-
nuptial donation for his son, the latter, whether he is under the control of
his father or has been emancipated, will be entitled to the estate of his
mother, or any property obtained in some other way, of which he cannot now
obtain the acquisition, and the usufruct of which solely remains with his
father, or of actions of any description which he has the right to bring
against his father.
A -doubt arose among the ancient authorities whether the father released
himself from liability from this obligation, when he promised or gave the dowry
or the ante-nuptial donation, or whether the obligation would continue to
retain its character and paternal liberality suggest the payment of the said
dowry or ante-nuptial donation. In a doubtful matter of this kind, a division
of opinion existed between the greater number of jurists, and the difficulty
was increased by the addition of the question (in case the father had stated in
the dotal contract that the dowry or ante-nuptial donation was bestowed out of
the property of both father and mother) whether the gift or promise should be
considered to have been made in proportion to half of his entire estate, or pro
rata,in accordance with the value of the estate
of each.
Therefore, for the purpose of positively putting an end to both of these
ambiguous points, We decree that if the father had thought that nothing further
should be added, but simply gave the dowry or the ante-nuptial donation, or
made a promise to do so, he must be understood to have done this induced by his
own generosity, and that what was due should retain its proper character; for
these laws are well known by which it has been provided that it is, by all
means, the duty of the father to give a dowry or an ante-nuptial donation for
the benefit of his offspring. Hence, an act of liberality of this kind shall
remain valid and irrevocable, and it, with the obligation, will enure
to their benefit.
Where, however, a father declares that he grants liberalities of this kind out
of his own property, or out of that of the mother, or of other persons which
cannot be acquired, or out of what he himself owes, then, if he is in absolute
want, the dowry or the ante-nuptial donation must be considered to have been
given out of the property belonging to his sons or his daughters. But if he
himself possesses considerable property, in this instance he will be understood
to have bestowed the dowry or the ante-nuptial donation out of his own estate;
for he would have been able to have given a dowry for his daughter or an ante-
nuptial donation for his son, in proportion to his means, and to have consented
that his children, if they desired to do so, might add a part, or even all of
that to which they were entitled through the generosity of their father in
giving the dowry or the ante-nuptial donation; so that it will actually be
apparent not only what he himself intended to give, but also what was derived
from the property of his children, and he would not be compelled to rely upon
vain statements, and thereby incur serious risk.
Given on the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of Lam-padius and
Orestes, 530.



* TITLE XII. CONCERNING THE LAW OF DOWRIES.

1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Nicephorus.
If property given as dowry is evicted, and an agreement or a promise has been
interposed, the son-in-law can bring a personal action, or one based on the
stipulation, against his father-in-law, his wife, or their heirs. When,
however, no agreement or promise was made, an action on purchase will lie after
the eviction, if an appraisement of the property was made. But where this was
not done, and the property was given in good faith by way of dowry, no action
will lie in favor of the husband. If, however, fraud for which the donor was
responsible existed, an action on the ground of fraud can be brought against
you, provided no fraud was committed by the woman; for then he will be entitled
to an action in factumto avoid one involving infamy being granted against her.
Given on the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Mutian and Favian, 202.

2. The Emperor Antoninus to Alluvias.
Where a stipulation was made with reference to the return of a part of the
dowry given, and the condition upon which this depended is fulfilled, he in
whose favor the agreement was planned and entered into will be entitled to an
action. In accordance with this, if your sister Polla is entitled to an action
for the recovery of half of the dowry because your mother, with the intention
of making a donation, permitted her daughter to stipulate for the return of
half of the dowry after her death, she need not apprehend an exception on the
ground of fraud, for the reason that she is the heir to less than half of the
estate of her mother, who made the agreement; unless it should be clearly
proved that the latter changed her mind with reference to the agreement for the
dowry, and desired that her daughter should be content with the preferred
legacy instead of her hereditary share of the estate, and intended that her
husband should be released from the necessity of making restitution.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Antoninus,
Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.

3. The Emperor Alexander to Euphemius.
Although the father has a right to demand restoration of the dowry when his
daughter dies during marriage, still, where the husband has by will legally
conferred freedom, both directly and under a trust, upon the dotal slaves, his
father cannot revoke it after it has once been granted, as the husband has free
power during marriage to manumit dotal slaves inter vivos.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof December, during the Consulate of Antoninus
and Alexander, 223.

4. The Same to Valens.
It is not prohibited by any laws for a woman to give all the property to her
husband by way of dowry.
Given on the fourth of the Idesof July, during the Consulate of Maximus, Consul
for the second time, and JElianus, 224.

5. The Same to Statia.
Whenever the property given as dowry is appraised, the husband obtains the
ownership of the same, but he becomes, as it were, the debtor for its value.
Therefore, if no agreement is made that the property shall be restored in case
the marriage is dissolved, and it has been legally appraised, he can retain it
if he tenders you the
money.
Given on the third of the Idesof April, during the Consulate of Alexander,
Consul for the second time, and Marcellus, 227.

6. The Emperor Maximian to Sulpitius.
If you have become the heir of your grandmother, she can transmit to you the
right of action based on the agreement for the recovery of the property which
she gave as dowry for your daughter, even though a verbal obligation may not
have been assumed. For the rule is not the same where the father or mother
makes a contract of this kind, as that of the mother gives a right to the Actio
prsescriptis verbis,and that that of the father is, by no means, considered to
change by a simple agreement the right .of action founded on the profectitial
dowry.
Given on the third of the Idesof February, during the Consulate of Maximian and
Africanus, 237.

7. The Emperor Gordian to Marcus.
Where a dowry is given by your father-in-law to you for the benefit of your
wife, and a stipulation is not added to it at the time when it is given, or
afterwards, your father-in-law, in making an agreement with you against the
consent of his daughter, cannot injure his own legal position; for when she
alone institutes proceedings with reference to the dowry, it is forbidden by
law for the agreement to operate to his disadvantage.
Given on the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Pius and Pontianus,
239.

8. The Same to Agrippina.
Even if the mother does not actually stipulate that the dowry shall be returned
to her, but that what she gave by way of dowry shall follow her, or belong to
her, in case her daughter should die during marriage, and the daughter does
die, We decree that it is perfectly just that the mother shall be held to have
acquired a right of action under the stipulation. The result of this is that
even property given as an addition to the dowry can be recovered by the same
action.
Given on the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of Sabinus and Venustus,
241.

9. The Emperor Decius, and the Csesar, to Urbicana.
Your claim for your dowry is preferable to that of the State to which your
husband subsequently became indebted.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof June, during the Consulate of Decius and
Gratus, 251.

10. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Ingenuus.
As you allege that the dowry which you received was appraised, it is apparent,
according to the Common Law, that under the agreement inserted in the dotal
contract, an action on purchase will lie, for who can doubt that the value of
the dowry is due from you to your wife; and that the property of which it is
composed will become deteriorated at your risk; or that its increase will enure
to your benefit?
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Acquilinus, 286.

11. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Severa.
There is no doubt that your husband will have a right of action with reference
to the property which you allege was given by way of dowry and subsequently
removed.
Given at Heraclea, on the tenth of the Kalendsof May, during the above-
mentioned Consulate.

12. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Rufina.
The land purchased by your husband with money forming part of the dowry is not
acquired by you, for a husband cannot acquire for his wife a right of action on
purchase, and only an action on dowry will lie in your favor. Therefore, if the
Governor of the province, after having been applied to, should find that you
have not made a compromise, but have obtained the larger part of the dowry, he
will provide for the return of the remainder.
Given at Heraclea, on the eighth of the Kalends ofMay, during the above-
mentioned Consulate.

13. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Catula and Statia.If any property
belonging to you has been given by your mother to your stepfather by way of
dowry, and he is aware that it is yours,
you are informed that such a gift has no validity in law, when no promise or
stipulation was made.
Given at Heraclea, on the day before the Kalendsof May, under the above-
mentioned Consulate.

14. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Basilissa.
A mother cannot be compelled to give a dowry for her daughter, unless some good
and sufficient cause exists for doing so, or she is expressly required to do so
by law, nor has a father any power to bestow a dowry out of the property of his
wife against her consent.
Given at Philippopolis, on the Nonesof November, during the above-mentioned
Consulate.

15. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Ulpian.
Where it is proved by other evidence that a dowry was given without the
execution of dotal instruments, it is established that, after a divorce has
taken place, the dowry of your former wife should be restored to her in
accordance with good faith, for if the documents are lost, any other legal
proofs which may be introduced will undoubtedly not be considered void.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof August, during the abovementioned
Consulate.

16. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Mmilius.
Your sister having succeeded to your father, who died intestate, is not
prohibited from giving, as her dowry, her undivided share of a tract of land,
before a division of the estate has been made.
Given on the Nonesof July, during the Consulate of the Csesars.

17. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Sabinus.
Your mother-in-law, by selling the usufruct which he had reserved for herself
out of the property that she gave you by way of dowry, can not deprive you of
the same.
Given on the Nonesof July, during the Consulate of the Csesars.

18. The Same to Menestratus. _If your mother-in-law conveyed a tract of land to
your wife with the reservation of the usufruct, and your wife gave the said
property to you by way of dowry, and then your mother-in-law transferred to you
the usufruct of the same, and if your wife should die during marriage, there is
no doubt that the land will remain in your hands in accordance with the terms
of the agreement entered into between you. If, however, your mother-in-law gave
her daughter the usufruct in consideration of receiving a certain sum of money
annually, and the latter should die, the usufruct will by no means be
extinguished.
Given on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of the
Csesars.

19. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Achilles.As you state that your father-in-
law, when giving you a dowry for his daughter, made an agreement to the effect
that if, after his own
death, his daughter should die during marriage, half of the said dowry should
be given to Amnia; and, after having made his will, and appointed Amnia his
heir, along with others, he directed that Amnia should not claim or agree to
anything under the stipulation, no action based on a contract made with another
will lie in her favor, unless it is proved that Amnia stipulated under the
terms of the agreement that the property should be returned to her.
If, however, by the interpretation of the contract, Amnia should have acquired
an obligation for herself, and, after the fulfillment of the condition, she
demands that the stipulation be carried out, and it is shown that the testator
had your interests in view, you can avail yourself of an exception against her,
on the ground that, after the deduction of the Falcidian portion, she has
received all that was agreed upon, according to the intention of the deceased.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of the
Caesars.

20. The Same Emperors and Cassars to Tiberia.
It is a perfectly clear rule of law that the husband, on account of the burdens
imposed by marriage, is entitled to the enjoyment of the income of the entire
dowry which he has obtained; and that if he should permit his wife to have it,
as a donation, he can bring suit for the amount to which she has been
pecuniarily benefited for this reason.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of the Caesars.

21. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Geminius.
If an agreement has been made between husband and wife that, if their marriage
should be dissolved in any way within the term of five years, the property
constituting the dowry, which was appraised, shall be returned in the same
condition and at the same value as the amount of the appraisement, it is clear
that the value of the property should not be paid, but that the very thing
itself must be returned; as, in agreements for its restoration, the value was
only mentioned to prevent the property from being diminished or destroyed, and
it should not be demanded at any other valuation than that at which it was
estimated.
Given at Agrippina on the Nonesof August, during the Consulate of the Csesars.

22. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Libyana.
Ason-in-law cannot alienate property given by his father-in-law as dowry for
his daughter.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the same
Cassars.

23. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Diogenes.If your wife should sell land
forming part of her dowry, it makes no difference whether she did so
voluntarily or ratified the contract
after it was made; for she cannot deprive you of the ownership of the same
against your consent.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate
of the Caesars.

24. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Aurelius and Lysimachus.
If you gave a dowry to the husband of your freedwoman, and did not provide by
an agreement or stipulation that it should be immediately returned to you, in
case the marriage was dissolved, it is established that if it should be
dissolved through the fault of the wife, the dowry will remain in the hands of
the husband, even if you can show that she has been guilty of ingratitude
towards you.
Given at Antioch, on the sixth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate
of the Csesars.

25. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Eutychianus.
Where a woman stipulates that the dowry shall be given her by her husband in
order that she may leave it by will, as, in this instance, the thought of death
precedes the time of the execution of the will, it does not contain a condition
but a consideration, and hence, if the woman should die intestate, it is proper
for the stipulation to take
effect.
Given at Antioch, on the third of the Idesof November, during
the Consulate of the Csesars.

26. The Same Emperors and Cassars to Demosthenes.
If your father at the time he gave a dowry to his son-in-law stipulated for his
daughter that it should be transferred to you, who were emancipated, he will
acquire a right of action for you, if he does not change his mind, and the law
does not forbid you to receive the
dowry.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of the same
Csesars.

27. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Pompeianus.
Although the dowry may lawfully remain in the hands of the husband, the heirs
of the estate of the wife, and not the former husband, are liable for public
contributions due from the estate.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of the
Csesars.

28. The Emperor Zeno to Mlianus, Prsstorian Prefect.
A woman, who is a minor, can legally give to, or demand from her husband a
dowry, with the general or special consent of her curator ; although he
himself, at the time of the constitution of the dowry, may have furnished a
surety for a sum less than the dowry is said
to amount to.
This rule shall also be observed where a minor has made an antenuptial donation
with the consent of his curator, as previously stated.
Given on the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of Basilius, Consul for
the second time, and Armatius, 476.

29. The Emperor Justinian to Menna, Praetorian Prefect.
Where the husband has been reduced to poverty during the marriage, and his wife
desires to provide for herself, and to hold the property encumbered to her as
dowry, as well as any given to her by an ante-nuptial donation, in addition to
the dowry, We grant her the benefit of an exception for the purpose of
disposing of the hypothecation in favor of a second creditor, not only if she
holds the property of her husband, and is brought into court on this account,
but also if she herself institutes proceedings with reference to the same
property which has been hypothecated to her, in accordance with the provision
of the law against persons who have in their possession property belonging to a
husband, and We decree that the existence of the marriage cannot be pleaded
against her, but that she can recover the said property from subsequent
creditors, or from other parties who are not recognized by the law as having a
better claim to it; and this she can do just as if the marriage had been
dissolved, and she was thereby enabled to recover the dowry or ante-nuptial
donation; provided, however, that the same woman shall not have the power to
alienate the property during the lifetime of her husband, and while the
marriage between them is still in existence.
She, however, will be entitled to use the income of said property for the
maintenance of herself and her husband, as well as for that of her children, if
she has any. The creditors of the husband will undoubtedly retain their rights
unimpaired against him and any property which he may subsequently acquire, and
the husband and wife themselves, if the marriage should be dissolved, also
shall enjoy their rights so far as any dowry or ante-nuptial donation given in
accordance with the terms of the dotal agreement is concerned.
Given on the third of the Idesof December, during the Consulate of Our Lord
Justinian, Consul for the second time, 528.

Extract from Novel 97, Chapter VI. Latin Text.

In a case of this kind, a donation made in consideration of matrimony can be
recovered during the continuance of the marriage.

30. The Same to Demosthenes, Prsetorian Prefect.
With reference to dotal property, whether it is movable or immovable, or
capable of moving itself (if it is still in existence) and whether it has been
appraised or not, We order that a wife shall have a perfect right to recover
it, after the marriage has been dissolved, and that no creditor of the husband,
even though he may be first in point of time, shall be able to claim preference
for himself through the hypothecation of said property, as it in the first
place belonged to the wife, and naturally remains subject to her ownership; for
the truth of the matter is not destroyed or confused by the subtlety of the law
which presumes that it has become a part of the estate of the husband.
Therefore, We desire that she shall be entitled to the action in remrelating to
property of this kind, as being her own, and can, in preference to all other
persons, bring the hypothecary action, so that whether the property of the wife
is considered to be hers in accordance with natural law, or through legal subtlety is held to have become
part of the estate of the husband, her interest shall be fully protected by
either of these two actions, that is to say, the one in rem,or the hypothecary
action.
Every exception based upon time, such as those of usucaption, the prescription
of ten or twenty years, or of thirty or forty years, or any other whatsoever,
authorized by the lapse of a longer or shorter period, may be pleaded against
women from the time when they begin to institute legal proceedings. These terms
will run against those who are married to wealthy husbands from the day when
the marriage was dissolved, and against those whose husbands are insolvent they
will run from the time when misfortune came upon them,; for while matrimony
exists, women can exercise their hypothecary rights against the property of
husbands who are poor, as has already been prescribed by the humane provisions
of Our law; and all pretense of divorce is absolutely forbidden in cases of
this kind to which Our law has
reference.
Read seven times in the New Consistory of the Palace of Justinian.
Given on the third of the Kalends of November,during the fifth Consulate of
Decius, 539.

31. The Same to Julian, Prsetorian Prefect.
When persons giving dowries for the benefit of women, whether they are their
mothers or other blood-relatives, or strangers, the husbands can receive them
without being obliged to have them recorded. When, however, a woman stipulates
for the return of a dowry under certain conditions, and the accidental
occurrence takes place, she herself is required to assign her rights of action,
or transfer the property to the person who gave the dowry, for the gift has
been decided to be void, because no record was made of it; and the result is
that the unfortunate woman may remain unendowed after many years of marriage
have passed, and even after children have been
born.
Therefore We decree that, in all these cases, no record shall be required, but
that such donations shall be valid, no matter who the parties are, and that the
woman herself shall be entitled to her dowry (when any accidental circumstance
has benefited her in this way), and that it shall remain absolutely in her
possession, unless he who gave it in the first place stipulated for its return
in a case of this kind. For then, as in the beginning, there was no supposition
that there would be any children, because he who gave the dowry stipulated that
the entire property should be returned to him; hence a discussion of this point
would be out of place. In all other instances, however, in which the owner
himself did not make such a stipulation, the woman shall, by an action of
dowry, have this peculiar consolation for the misfortune which she has
undergone.
(1) Likewise, a stranger (that is to say, one to whose authority the
beneficiary is not subject) has given an ante-nuptial donation in behalf of
another to a woman who is about to be married, and has made the necessary
record of the same, whether the donation is in
excess of the lawful amount, or the woman about to be married was not a minor,
but independent, not only will the record be sufficient for her to whom the
ante-nuptial donation was given, but will also be sufficient for the persons on
whose account it was bestowed; so that if any profit should be derived from the
dotal agreement, this shall not belong to the donor, but the husband shall
benefit by it, and shall hold it intact and irrevocable, unless the donor
stipulated for it to be returned to him under such circumstances; in order
that, in the abovementioned instance, a defect similar to the previous one may
not arise. Where, however, the donation is of trifling value, or the
transaction has been effected in such a way that the record is absolutely void,
the donation shall then be valid so far as both parties are concerned, and the
husband will profit by it, unless the donor stipulated that he himself should
have this advantage.
(2) Again, We decree that where anyone has promised lands, or a certain income,
or a house, or a public allowance of provisions, by way of dowry, or has
contracted to furnish the same, and two years have elapsed since the marriage
took place, he shall immediately furnish the income, or the rent, as well as
the public allowance of provisions, to the person entitled to the same, even if
the principal property has not yet been delivered.
When the entire dowry consists of gold and the said term of two years has
expired, he shall be required to pay interest on the same at the rate of three
per cent. But where other property, instead of land or gold, is given as dowry,
whether it consists of silver, female ornaments, clothing, or any other
articles whatsoever, and it has been appraised after the lapse of two years,
interest at three per cent can, in like manner, be collected. The appraisement
(for the reason that it is necessary to explain this clearly) is understood to
mean a valuation of articles of the same kind, or of every species of dotal
property, that is to say, when it consists of silver, ornaments, clothing, or
other personal effects, and it must not be expected that, after the separate
appraisement of each article, a combination of all of them will be made, as
this would be unnecessary and pernicious, because of offering temptation for
the exercise of too much subtlety.
If, however, the movable property should not be appraised after the lapse of
two years, those rules must be observed which the laws have prescribed with
reference to everything oT this kind, after issue has been joined in court.
When the property is of a mixed description, consisting partly of gold, and
partly of other movable or immovable possessions, everything shall proceed as
if a division had already been made, and the husband shall not be refused
permission to claim the dowry whenever he desires to do so. Nor shall he who
owes it think that if he pays the income, the rents, the interest, or any other
accessories, he has a right to defer the delivery of the dowry itself, but the
husband can demand it, either before the expiration of two years, or
afterwards, and can exact it in accordance with the laws.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Lampadius
and Orestes, 530.



* TITLE XIII. CONCERNING THE CONSOLIDATION OF THE ACTION TO RECOVER THE PROPERTY OF THE WIFE AND THAT BASED ON A STIPULATION, AND CONCERNING THE NATURE OF THE PROPERTY GIVEN AS DOWRY.

1. The Emperor Justinian to the People of the City of Constantinople, and to
Those of all the Provinces.
We now come to a matter of no small importance at the present time, and which
is to be found in almost all the body of the law, namely, the action with
reference to the property of the wife, and that based on a stipulation. Now,
after disposing of the resemblances and differences of the two, We intend to
unite in a single proceeding every right of action pertaining to the property
of the wife with the one resulting from the stipulation, which We think to be
worthy of attention. Therefore, having abolished the Actio rei uxoriss,We
decree that all dowries shall be recovered by means of the action based on a
stipulation, whether the latter was reduced to writing or not, in order that,
by the transaction itself, it may be understood that the stipulation was
entered into. In the same manner, if the stipulation was improperly made, it
must rather be remedied than annulled. For if one stipulation contained in the
document is found to be valid, it shall be considered to confer validity upon
others which are void; and why should not legal force be conferred by Our
Decree upon stipulations of this description? For if it is proper for Us, who
promulgate the decree, to suppose that a stipulation was made where one does
not exist, there is much more reason for one to be rendered valid which is
void.
(1) And, in order that complete relief may be afforded to dowries, as in the
case of the administration of the property of wards, and many other legal
matters, We have admitted the existence of tacit hypothecation; so also, in a
proceeding of this kind We assume hypothecation to have taken place on both
sides, on the part of the husband for the restitution of the dowry, arid on the
part of the wife for furnishing it, or against the eviction of the property of
which it is composed; whether the principal parties interested have given,
promised or received the dowry themselves, or others have done so for them; and
whether the dowry is adventitious or profectitious, in accordance with the
provisions of the ancient law.
In this law, the rusticity and ignorance of men cannot operate to their
prejudice, since in this instance We have made provision for their inexperience
and want of knowledge. For as stipulations and hypothecations are understood to
form part of dotal transactions, and stipulations which are invalid may be
corrected, so, hereafter every dotal contract shall be held to be valid and
perfect, just as if all the documents relating thereto had been drawn up by men
thoroughly learned in the law. And let no one think that, in the case of
dowries, We only have reference to such as are included in written instruments,
for. as there is nothing to prevent a dowry being given,
promised, or received without the agreement having been reduced to writing, in
like manner, a stipulation, or an hypothecation made by either party, must be
understood to exist, just as if it had been written. These matters are
understood to indicate the character of the proceeding based on the
stipulation, the Actio rei uxorisebeing from this time abolished.
(2) But although We are aware that the action based on a stipulation is one of
strict law, and was not a bona fideone; still, for the reason that the
stipulation acquires a new character for itself from the dowry, the Actio rei
uxoriseshall be applied to it, as well as those derived from good faith.
All the effects which the dowry obtains from the stipulation it shall continue
to exercise in accordance with its nature; for when, indeed, We found anything
better in the Actio rei uxoriss,We especially added it to the present one, so
that the action on stipulation which We have established may be new, and not
only adorned with its own excellence, but also with that of the ancient
proceeding.
(3) In the first place, the nature of the action on stipulation will be
explained, and if anything remains to be added from the Actio rei uxoriseit
shall be done. Hence, it should be known that the Edict of the Praetor, which
was introduced with reference to these actions, is annulled, so far as the one
on stipulation is concerned; so that the wife can receive what was left to her
by her husband, and can obtain her dowry, unless her husband has specially left
her property in lieu of it, since it is perfectly evident that a testator who
did not make this provision intended that she should have both.
(4) The right of action based on the stipulation shall pass intact, and without
delay of transmission, to the heirs.
(5) Nothing shall be stated with regard to the retention of the dowry. For why
should it be necessary to retain it on account of the morals of the woman, when
she is granted other relief by the Imperial Constitutions? Or for what reason
should retention be made of the dowry on account of any property which has been
given, when the donor has a right, by means of a direct action in rem,,or a
praetorian action, or a personal one for recovery, to provide his own remedy?
Nor is retention necessary where property has been removed, as all husbands are
entitled to an action on this ground. Let no allusion be made to retention on
account of children, as the natural impulse itself induces parents to rear
their children.
In order to prevent husbands from inventing all kinds of offences against their
wives to enable them to retain their dowries, it has already been established
by the Imperial Constitutions that marriage can be dissolved if the wife is to
blame, when it becomes necessary for this to be done. The retention of the
dowry because of expense incurred to preserve the property of which it is
composed does not seem to Us to be a sufficient cause; for, while necessary
expenses diminish the amount of the dowry, the useful ones should not be
deducted, when the Actio rei uxorisais employed, unless with the consent of the
woman; and it is not foreign to the question that her consent
should be obtained, for the action on mandate can be granted by Our authority
to the husband against the wife, to enable him by this means to obtain what he
has expended for the benefit of her property. If the consent of the woman
should not be given, and the expenses have been properly incurred, the action
on the ground of voluntary agency will be sufficient if brought against her.
When, however, the expenses were incurred for pleasure, even though this may
have been done with her consent, the husband will be permitted to remove
whatever he constructed (without, however, causing any injury to the property
as it previously existed), so that the discussion of all of these methods of
retention may finally be disposed of, and the action based on the stipulation
shall, in accordance with its nature', and with good reason, admit of no
retention.
(6) In maintaining the right of action under the stipulation, there is no doubt
whatever that if the woman should die during the existence of the marriage, her
dowry will not benefit her husband, unless some agreement was made for this
purpose. But the right of action based on the stipulation will, in accordance
with its provisions, be transmitted to the heirs of the woman, whether this was
expressed in the agreement or not, or is understood to do so by virtue of this
law.
(7) As in the case of the exaction of a dowry, the action based on the
stipulation naturally requires that restitution of the whole amount of the
dowry shall immediately be made by the husband, and it directs that this shall
be done in three annual payments, where the property is such that it can be
weighed, counted, or measured, and that not the entire amount, but only so much
as the husband can furnish, shall -be returned where he has not, with
fraudulent intent, diminished his estate. Under these circumstances, We grant
the remedy of the action on stipulation, so that where the marriage has been
dissolved, and no agreement has been made, the husband shall only have judgment
rendered against him for an amount which he is able to pay, for the reason that
this is perfectly just, and due to the respect which the husband has a right to
claim, if he has not been guilty of fraud; and he should also provide security
that, if his fortune improves, he will attempt to make good the deficiency. The
restitution of the dowry shall be made, not in payments in one, two, and three
years, but entirely within a single year, where it consists of movable
property, or of such as can move itself, or of such as is incorporeal; and any
other which is attached to the soil shall be restored without delay; which rule
applies to both actions.
If, however, the husband should fail to return the movable property, or that
which can move itself, or that which is incorporeal, after the lapse of a year,
or the land immediately after the dissolution of the marriage, he must pay
interest at the rate of three per cent upon the valuation of all which is not
immovable, which can be collected in good faith, and he must give up the crops
which have been gathered from the time that the marriage was dissolved; and, in
like manner, all rents and profits derived from transportation by ships or
beasts of burden, or from the labors of slaves, and whatever is obtained from
the public distribution of provisions, or from any other similar source, shall
be surrendered to the woman.
(8) Therefore, with reference to the following Section, the action based on the
stipulation still retains its distinctive character; so that where a woman has
been appointed heir by her husband, and a question as to the reservation of the
portion of the Falcidian Law arises, she will be permitted to deduct her dowry
from the estate of her husband, just as in the case of other debts, and
afterwards deduct the Falcidian fourth.
(9) As the action on the stipulation maintains its own character in those
instances which We have enumerated, it is necessary in the following Sections
to explain what is common to both proceedings, and show what can only be
obtained by the action on stipulation, or what is peculiar to that for the
recovery of the property of the wife, so that it may all be combined in the
action on stipulation. Hence the offspring of female slaves forming a part of
the dowry, that is to say, such as have not been appraised, as well as whatever
property the dotal slaves may have acquired in any way (except through the use
of the property of the husband, or by their own labor), is in both actions also
considered to belong to the woman. The young of beasts of burden, and
everything included under the name of crops, belong to the husband during the
time of marriage, whether they have been appraised, or not. The crops of the
last year, during which the marriage was dissolved, should be transferred to
both parties pro rata,according to the time, and of course where the property
has not been appraised, this rule applies to both actions. The husband who, as
the purchaser of property which has been appraised, enjoys the benefit of it,
must bear the loss, and is liable for the risk attending the same.
(10) The son of the deceased person who, through preference, obtains the dowry
of his wife or his daughter-in-law, by means of an action in partition, must,
in accordance with a rule peculiar to the action on stipulation, furnish his
co-heirs security that he will defend the title to the property constituting
the dowry.
(11) Therefore, let us see what ought to be taken from the action to recover
the property of the wife and added to that on stipulation. It is a positive and
undoubted rule of law that if a relative in the ascending male line, after
having provided a dowry for his daughter or granddaughter, should emancipate
her, or should himself die, by employing the Actio rei uxorise,the dowry will
absolutely belong to the woman, even if she had been disinherited (which was
not the case in the action on stipulation, for it, like other actions, was
divided among all the heirs).
It seems to Us to be perfectly just that the woman should receive her dowry
through preference by an action on stipulation, whether she was emancipated or
disinherited, or appointed with other heirs.
(12) This rule having been adopted by Us, many others have been promptly
disposed of, as the dowry can exclude the action for in-
officiousness (especially if it is equal in amount to the fourth prescribed by
law), and can be placed in the mass of the estate, if the head of the household
should die intestate; or if, having executed a will, the testator made this
provision. All these matters have been derived from the Actio rei uxorise,and
incorporated into the action on stipulation.
(13) Another provision derived from the action to recover the property of the
wife has been added to the action on stipulation. For when a stranger, no
matter who he might be, gave a dowry, without having made any stipulation or
agreement with reference to its return to himself, the woman could bring the
Actio rei uxorise,which right was not formerly included in the action on
stipulation.
Where a stipulation was made, or an agreement entered into, the stipulator, or
he who made the agreement, was entitled to a civil action under the
stipulation, or one prgsscriptis verbis.At the present time, however, We do not
wish this to be done, but where the stranger, in giving the dowry, did not
especially stipulate or provide that it should be returned to him, it is then
presumed that the woman herself made the stipulation, and that, under the
circumstances, the dowry should be acquired by her. Nor do We desire that, in
an instance of this kind, a stranger shall be considered to have made a tacit
stipulation, in order that what We have introduced for the benefit of women may
not be employed to their disadvantage; nay more, in dowries like these, which
are either given or promised by .strangers, the woman herself is considered to
have made a tacit stipulation, unless the stranger expressly agreed or
stipulated that the dowry should be returned to him; as, by not having entered
into a stipulation, he is considered rather to have made a donation to the
woman than a provision for his own benefit.
We understand by the term "stranger" every person, with the exception of a
relative of the male sex in the ascending line, who does not have the female
who is endowed under his control, for We grant a tacit right Of action based on
the stipulation to a relative of this description.
(14) The following provision, also derived from the Actio rei uxorise,has also
been included in the action'on stipulation. For when, after the marriage has
been dissolved, the dowry is claimed by the father of the woman, if there was
ground for the action to recover the property of the wife, he could not proceed
alone without the consent of the daughter. And if he should die before suit was
brought, or even after issue had been joined, the dowry would revert to the
daughter as a part of her own property. This, however, was not the case in the
action on stipulation, for there the father alone had the right to exact the
dowry, without waiting for the consent of his daughter, and if he died, he
transmitted it to his heirs. But it is sufficiently humane, sufficiently
dutiful, and sufficiently advantageous to marriage, for the right attaching to
the action, to recover the property of the wife to be transferred to the action
on stipulation.
Extract from Novel 97, Ciiapter V. Latin Text.
But although the dowry may be returned to the father, either by the right of
paternal control, or under the terms of an agreement, he, nevertheless, is not
permitted to diminish the original amount of it, when his daughter marries a
second time, unless his estate has been lessened by some accidental misfortune,
for then he is not compelled to furnish any larger dowry to the second husband
than his means will permit.
END OP THE EXTRACT.
THE TEXT OP THE CODE FOLLOWS.
(15) And as the Lex Juliaforbade the alienation of dotal land situated in Italy
to be made by the husband, without the permission of his wife, and also did not
permit him to hypothecate it, if his wife had not consented, We have been asked
if it was not necessary for a provision of this kind to apply not only to lands
in Italy, but to all others. Hence We have decided to extend this rule so as to
include not only lands in Italy, but also to those of the province. As,
however, We have, by this law, given the right of hypothecation to the woman,
she has a sufficient remedy, if her husband should desire to alienate the land,
but to prevent her from voluntarily impairing her right of hypothecation, it
becomes necessary under such circumstances to come to the relief of women; and
hence We have added that a husband cannot only not hypothecate land forming
part of the dowry, without the consent of his wife, but that he cannot alienate
it, lest, through the weakness of his nature, he may suddenly be reduced to
poverty.
For although the Anastasian Law treats of the consent of women, and of those
who renounce their rights, still, it must be understood with reference to the
property of the husband, or to a dowry which has been appraised, that, as the
ownership of the same belongs to the husband, he will also be responsible for
the risk.
So far, however, as land which has not been appraised, and which is very
properly styled dotal is concerned, the right which was incomplete under the
Julian Law, but has been fully provided for by Ours, shall remain intact, and
shall not only be observed in Italy, but in all other lands, and can be
abrogated solely by hypothecation.
(16) We have considered it necessary to add as a general provision to the
present law, that, when any agreements have been made for the restitution of
the dowry, or for time, or for interest, or for anything else which is not
contrary to the laws or constitutions, they shall be executed. Where, however,
the marriage has been dissolved by repudiation, all the rights included either
in the Theodosian Law or Ours shall be preserved intact.
In like manner, the provisions enumerated in the Anastasian Law, with reference
to persons separated by common consent, shall remain firm and unimpaired.
And, generally speaking, whatever has been provided by the Sacred
Constitutions, or by the works of learned jurists, which is not found to be
opposed to this law, shall remain in full force, and be included
in the action on stipulation; even though it may have been discussed under the
action for the recovery of the property of the wife.
We direct that these rules shall only apply to dowries which have been given or
promised after the promulgation of this law, even if they have not been reduced
to writing. For We do not permit instruments that have been already drawn up to
be deprived of their force, but time must be given for them to take effect.
Given on the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of Lam-padius and
Orestes, 530.



* TITLE XIV.
CONCERNING AGREEMENTS MADE WITH REFERENCE TO DOWRIES AND ANTE-NUPTIAL
DONATIONS, AS WELL AS SUCH AS RELATE TO THE PRIVATE PROPERTY OP THE
WIFE.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Nica.
The condition which you impose when you give a dowry to a ward whom you have
brought up must be observed, and the objection ordinarily interposed, namely,
that a right of action is not derived from the contract, cannot be raised, for
We only state this when a contract is without consideration. It is otherwise
when money is given, and an agreement is entered into with reference to its
repayment ; for then an equitable action will lie for its recovery.
Given on the seventh of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulship of
Albinus and ^milianus, 207.
2. The Emperor Antoninus to Theodota.
You should entertain no doubt that the income from land given by way of dowry
cannot be recovered, where, in accordance with an agreement, it has been used
for your expenses.
Given on the eleventh of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of
Antoninus, Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
3. The Emperor Gordian to Torquata. :
Although your father, when he gave you in marriage, may have agreed that, if
your husband should die leaving children belonging to you both, a portion of
the dowry should be retained in their name, still, an agreement of this kind
can be of no benefit so long as you are entitled to an action to recover the
entire amount of the dowry.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof January, during the Consulate of Gordian and
Aviola, 214.
4. The Same to Agathus.
When you allege that, by the dotal contract in accordance with which your
mother agreed with your father that if she died during marriage, the dowry
should be restored to you and your brothers, the stipulation with reference to
you will not be legal, if you were
not all under the control of your father, and if she should die during the
marriage, an action in your behalf will not lie. Where, however, a verbal
obligation was properly contracted, you will have the right to demand the
dowry, and will not be prevented from asserting your claim, especially if you
are no longer subject to paternal authority.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof June, during the Consulate of Sabinus and
Venustus, 241.
5. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Claudius.
An estate passes by will to strangers. Therefore, when you assert that by a
dotal instrument, an agreement instead of a will was interposed, by the terms
of which, after the death of the wife, her property, to which you are not
entitled as dowry, will belong to you, you are advised that you cannot, by any
proceeding, sue her heirs or successors, in order that what is in no way due
may be delivered to you.
Given on the Nonesof February, during the Consulate of the abovementioned
Emperors.
6. The Same Emperors and Czesars to Rufus.
Where it was agreed that if the wife should die during marriage, the dowry
should remain in the hands of the husband, it is established by law that an
agreement of this kind precludes the recovery of the dowry which came from the
father, as it has frequently been determined by legal authority that the
condition of the dowry, of which the father has the sole right of recovery,
cannot be rendered worse by a contract.
7. The Same Emperors and Cassars to Philetus.
Where a father agreed that a dowry given for his daughter to his son-in-law
should be transferred to his grandchildren, if she should die first during the
marriage, although he cannot bring suit in their behalf, still, a pratorian
action will lie for their benefit in accordance with the principles of equity.
Given at Nicomedia, on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of the Csesars.
8. The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian to Hormisdas, Prse-torian Prefect.
We decree by this law that the husband shall not interfere with any of the
property which his wife has exclusive of her dowry, and which the Greeks
designate as parapherna,if she forbids him to do so, nor can he impose any
necessity upon her in this respect. For, although it is well that the wife, who
entrusts herself to her husband, should also permit her property to be
controlled by his judgment, still, as it is only proper that the legislators
should comply with the rules of equity, We are not willing (as has already been
stated) that the husband should in any way meddle with the property of the wife
against her consent.
Given during the Idesof ...
9. The Emperors Leo and Anthemius to Necostratus, Prsetorian Prefect.
We decree that, at the death of either the husband or wife, he or she shall be
entitled to the same share, and not the same amount of money that the husband
would be entitled to from the dowry, or the wife from the ante-nuptial
donation; for instance, if the husband had given an ante-nuptial donation of a
hundred solidi,the wife shall be permitted to give a dowry of a smaller or a
larger amount; and the husband shall be allowed to give an ante-nuptial
donation in the same way.
It should, however, be observed that whatever amount the wife stipulates to
give up out of the ante-nuptial donation, if her husband should happen to die
first, the husband also should stipulate for himself concerning the dowry (but
not with regard to a sum of money), if the wife should be the first to die
during marriage. When an agreement is made contrary to what is herein provided,
We order that it shall be null and void, and that no recovery can take place by
virtue of it.
We decree that the same rule shall be observed where a father has given or
promised an ante-nuptial donation, in behalf of his son, or a mother, or the
future husband, provided he is his own master, or anyone else whosoever, has
done so in behalf of the future bride. In like manner, if the father or mother,
or the future wife, if she is her own mistress, or someone else, should give or
promise a dowry in her behalf to her future husband, she herself will be
considered to have tendered the dowry, when it is offered by any other person
for her benefit. This is true to the extent that she can claim for herself the
dowry tendered by another in her behalf, unless he who tendered it may have
stipulated or agreed immediately (that is to say, at the time of the offer or
promise), that the aforesaid dowry should be returned to him.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof September, during the second Consulate
of the Emperor Anthemius, 408.
Extract from Novel 97, Chapter I. Latin Text.
Equality should, by all means, be observed with reference to dowries and ante-
nuptial donations, not merely concerning the profit which may be derived from
them, but also with regard to the guarantee and constitution of both, and no
increase in the same shall be made by anyone; or, in case this is done, the
amount of the augmentation must be the same on both sides, in order that the
equality may not in this way be destroyed.
Extract from Novel 2, Last Chapter. Latin Text.
Where, however, the wife has given nothing of the dowry agreed upon, she can
receive nothing whatever from the ante-nuptial donation, in case of the death
of her husband. Likewise, if she gave less than she promised, she can only
benefit by an amount in proportion to what she bestowed.
10. The Emperor Justinian to Menna, Pr&torian Prefect.
In accordance with a law of the Emperor Leo, of Divine Memory, it is provided
that agreements with reference to dowries and antenuptial donations should
agree with reference to the amounts, but nothing was added as to what should be
done if this rule was not observed; and We, desiring that everything should be
clear, do hereby order that, where the amounts are unequal, the larger one
should be reduced so as to correspond with the smaller, in order that, in this
way, both parties may obtain amounts equal to the smaller one.
Given at Constantinople, on the eighth of the Idesof April, during the
Consulate of Decius, 529.
11. The Same to John, Prastorian Prefect.
Where a woman has given evidences of debt to her husband (that is to say notes,
bearing interest) which are not included in her dowry, with the intention that
they shall remain in the hands of her husband as her own private property, and
this has been inserted into the dotal contract, the question arose whether the
husband would be entitled to any action either direct or equitable, growing out
of the transaction, or whether the notes would all remain with the wife, and
under what circumstances the right to bring suit should be granted to the
husband. Therefore, We order that if anything of this kind should take place,
the right of action shall by all means remain with the wife, but that
permission shall be granted the husband to institute proceedings before
competent judges; that no guarantee of ratification shall be required of him;
and that any interest derived from said securities shall be expended for the
benefit of himself and his wife, but any money forming part of the principal
which he may collect, shall be used for the benefit of the wife, or shall be
employed for any purpose to which she may give her consent.
If, however, it is expressly stated in the dotal instrument that the said
securities shall be hypothecated for the property of the husband, the wife must
remain content with this hypothecation. But if this is not found to be included
in the dotal contract, under Our present law, she will be entitled to a lien on
the property of her husband, from the time when he collected the money. For,
before the wife herself will have the power (if she should desire to exercise
it) to bring any actions, either by her husband or by other parties, collect
the money, and receive the said notes from her husband, proper security should
be given him. While the said notes remain in his hands, he will be responsible
for fraud, and must display the same diligence with reference to them which he
is found to exercise concerning his own property, in order that his wife may
not suffer loss through neglect or criminality on his part. If this should
happen, he himself will be compelled to indemnify the wife out of his own
property.
Given on the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of Lam-padius and
Orestes, 530.



* TITLE XV. CONCERNING DOWRY PROVIDED FOR BUT NOT PAID.
1. The Divine Severus and Antoninus to Dionysia.
Payment, and not the contents of the dotal instrument, constitutes a dowry;
therefore you are aware that you cannot be permitted to demand your dowry
unless you prove that it has actually been given by you.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Chilo
and Libo, 205.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Papiniana.
Whatever a husband has added out of his own property to the dowry, with the
intention of giving it during the existence of the marriage, can be demanded by
the heirs of the husband, to the extent that his liberality was exercised, if
he should die during the marriage and did not revoke the said donation which
was lawfully made and given as a dotal increase.
Given on the Nonesof December, during the Consulate of the Emperor Alexander,
Consul for the third time, and Dio, 230.
3. The Emperor Justinian to Menna, Prastorian Prefect.
With reference to dowries which it is customary to mention in dotal instruments
as having been given, when in fact they have not yet been paid, but only a
promise has been made to pay them, it shall be lawful to interpose the
exception based on the non-payment of money, not only by the husband against
the wife or her heirs, when the marriage has been dissolved either by the death
or the repudiation of the wife, but also by the heirs of the husband, where the
marriage has been dissolved by his death, and by the father-in-law or his
heirs; if it was stated in the dotal instrument that he received a dowry along
with his son, as well as against every person who is stated in writing to have
received the dowry with the husband, and his heirs; provided, however, that
this privilege shall be granted only within a continuous year from the death of
the husband or the wife, or from the date of the notice of repudiation.
Given on the Kalendsof July, during the Second Consulate of Our Lord, the
Emperor Justinian.
Extract from Novel 100, Chapter II. Latin Text.
This takes place where the marriage is dissolved within the space of two years.
If this should occur after the expiration of two years, but before the tenth
year has elapsed, the husband himself, as well as his heir, shall have the
right to make complaint within the term of three months. Where, however, the
period of ten years has elapsed, no complaint shall, under any circumstances,
be permitted, but the right to complete restitution shall be allowed, above
all, if minority is involved in the case.



* TITLE XVI.
CONCERNING DONATIONS MADE BETWEEN HUSBAND AND WIFE, AND BY PARENTS TO THEIR
CHILDREN, AND CONCERNING RATIFICATION.
1." The Emperor Antoninus to Triphena.
Since the Treasury has taken possession of the property of your husband as
being without an owner, he having left no heirs, any donations made by him
cannot be revoked, if he continued in the same mind to the end of his life.
Given on the third of the Idesof January, under the Consulate of the two
Aspers, 213.
2. The Same to the Soldier Marcus.
If you prove before the Governor of the province that the female slave in
question was purchased with your money, even though it was stated in the bill
of sale that she was destined as a gift to your concubine, he must order her to
be restored to you; for although this donation may be valid where matrimony
does not exist, still I am unwilling that my soldiers should, by means of
perfidious blandish-^ ments, be plundered in this way by their concubines.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of the
Emperor Antoninus, Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
3. The Same to Epictetus.
The donation of slaves and other property which you say was made to you by your
wife was confirmed by a Constitution of mine and my Divine Father Severus,
provided that she was her own mistress when she made the donation, or did so
with the consent of her father, and remained of the same mind with reference to
it until the last day of her life. If, however, the donation was made by your
father-in-laW after the death of his daughter, it also will be valid as a
donation inter vivos.
Given on the fourth of the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of the Emperor
Antoninus, Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
4. The Same to Claudian.
Donations cannot, under the Civil Law, be made between persons to whom the
husband and wife are legally subject, and where either of them is under their
control.
Given on the third of the Idesof August, under the Consulate of the two Aspers,
213.
5. The Emperor Alexander to Quintilla.
If (as you state) your father was under the control of the same person that you
were, and gave as a donation to your husband (his
son-in-law) a certain instrument executed by a debtor, and died during your
marriage, and you were afterwards separated from your husband, the transaction
is not valid.
Given on the Idesof February, under the Consulate of Albinus and Maximus, 228.
6. The Same to Nepotianus.
Although property which belonged to you by law was deposited in the name of
your wife, the title to the same cannot be affected on this account, even
though anyone may suppose that by this transaction you have donated your
property to her, as a donation made during marriage, and before the death of
the wife who profited by the liberality, is void. Nor is it unknown that the
ancient legislators very correctly held the opinion that, when a wife cannot
explain how she acquired property honorably during marriage, she is presumed to
have obtained it from the estate of her husband.
Given on the Nonesof December, during the Consulate of the Emperor Alexander,
Consul for the third time, and Dio, 230.
7. The Same to Theodota.
Where, in accordance with the will of your father, you married the son of your
guardian, the donation made to your husband is void in law. If, however, the
marriage is not legally valid (although the donation in this case is not void)
for the reason that the person who cannot be called your husband, is unworthy,
equitable actions for the recovery of the donation will lie in your favor.
Given on the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Rufus and Maximus, 233.
8. The Same to Leo.
If you permitted your wife to take the crops of the land which you received as
dowry, during the time of marriage, and she consumed them, you demand without
reason that they shall be restored to you, after a divorce has taken place. If,
however, she was enriched by them, she can be sued for the excess.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Maximus
and Paternus, 234.
9. The Emperor Gordian to Origen.
Although slaves have been purchased by your wife with your money, still, if
they were delivered to her, their ownership belongs not to you but to her, and
you only have a right to recover the money, whether you made the payment while
transacting her business, or you gave her the amount of the price as a
donation. Hence you can bring a competent action against her for the entire sum
or for the amount by which she has become enriched.
Given on the seventh of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Pius and
Pontianus, 239.
10. The Same to Valerian.
If the former husband of your wife, being his own master, gave her lands or
other property as a donation, and' continued in the same mind up to the time of
his death, the donation will be confirmed by a Rescript of the Divine Severus.
But if the father of the deceased unjustly took the property, he will be
compelled by the Governor of the province to return it; for even if the death
of the husband was caused by the wickedness of his wife, he, while imputing to
her the offence, should not, under the pretext of the accusation, deprive her
of the property given to her, as a case where liberality is involved differs
from a criminal accusation.
Given on the seventh of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of Arian
and Pappus, 244.
11. The Same to Maximus.
Just as a claim for the amount which the husband promised his wife every month,
or every year, for her own private use, cannot be allowed, so, it is clear
that, for the same reason, money paid and expended on this account cannot be
recovered.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of the Emperor
Gordian, Consul for the second time, and Pompeianus, 242.
12. The Same to Secundina.
If your husband, having become involved in debt, encumbered to his creditors
land previously given to you as a donation, and which you, on this ground,
claim under your rights, you are advised that the said obligation interferes
with your defence; for it is evident that a donation made by a husband to his
wife is not only revoked by an obligation of this kind, but also by a donation
or sale of his property, or by any other mode of alienation of the same
whatsoever.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of Arian and
Pappus, 244.
13. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Rufina.
If (as you state) the land given to you as a donation by your husband was
encumbered by him to his creditors, there is no doubt that the alienation will
be valid after the deduction of the amount of the indebtedness (that is, where
the policy of the law does not deprive the creditor of his right of action).
If, however, the donation was legally made, either because this was done before
marriage, or under the circumstances in which a donation is allowed to take
place during its existence, the obligation is invalid, for it is certain that
the act of your husband, whom you allege is dead, cannot affect your rights.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Aquilinus, 286.
14. The Same to Octaviana.
The right to demand a legacy or a trust is not, by any means, conferred by the
mere insertion of words in last wills, although they
may be useful for the purpose of trusts or legacies, but this is only the case
where expressions are inserted with the intention of bequeathing the property;
hence, it is clear that the matter contained in your petition involves a
question of intent, and not of law. Therefore, after having read the will, We
notice that your husband, by a preceding donation, reserved the ownership of
the property for you, and afterwards stated that you should obtain it for your
greater security, and the meaning of the words does not indicate that a trust
was left, but that your husband authorized by the Decree of the Senate, when
about to die, provided that the gift of the ownership of the property should be
confirmed, and secured to you, as far as this could be done at the time of his
decease.
Given on the third of the Nonesof October, under the Consulate of the same
Emperors.
15. The Same to Justus and Others.
If your father did not enter into a true contract, but donated the possession
of certain property to your mother by a species of sale, and the remainder of
his estate was not sufficient to satisfy the Treasury for what was due from him
as Chief Centurion of the Triarii, although he did not change his mind with
reference to the donation, still, recourse must be had to the identical
property for the purpose of making up the amount which could not be collected
from what was left by him. If, however, your father, by changing his mind,
interrupted the course of his bounty, there is no doubt that the ownership of
the said property will revert to his estate.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of
Tyberianus and Dio, 291.
16. The Same to Theodore.
If your emancipated sons should acquire for themselves the estate of their
mother, prove before the Governor of the province that you did not purchase the
land in question in the name of your wife for the purpose of giving it to her,
but that you have already made use of her name, which you can do by showing
that the ownership of the said land was transferred to you by the vendors,
through their giving possession of the same, so that the injustice of your
children having been exposed, your title to the property may remain unimpaired.
If, however, you did this with the intention of bestowing the land upon her,
the right of action to recover the purchase-money will lie in your favor.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Tyberianus and
Dio, 291.
17. The Same Emperors and Cassars to Capitolina.
With reference to the property brought into the house in addition to the dowry,
and which you allege has been consumed by your husband, if this was done by you
for the purpose of making a donation, you are informed that you will only have
a right of action against
the heirs for the amount by which your husband profited. If, however, he used
the property against your consent, the whole of it must be returned to you.
Given at Heraclea, on the eighth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate
of the same Emperors, 291.
18. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Materna.
Where a donation is made by a husband to his wife during marriage, the
ownership of the property cannot be transferred in the beginning; nor
afterwards, if a divorce should take place, or if the person who is the
recipient of the bounty should die first; nor can it subsequently become valid,
if it has been revoked by him who gave it.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of the
same Emperors.
19. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Dionysia.
If your mother transferred a house to you during your marriage she renders it
part of your property.
Given on the Idesof July, at Philippopolis, during the Consulate of the
Csesars.
20. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Claudia.
Acreditor, after his debt has been paid, cannot transfer to the wife of his
former debtor any of the pledges which has been released, nor will the consent
of the said debtor, acceded to by his former creditor, avail to any extent to
transfer the ownership of the property by a fictitious sale; as not only
simulated transactions, but also such as have reference to donations of
property to a wife by her husband during marriage, are considered as never
having been made on account of their prohibition by the Civil Law (when you
suppose the case that a wife is survived by her husband).
21. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Maucalia.
Where, by engagements which you yourself contracted, you borrowed money and
spent it for your husband, with the intention of considering it a donation, as
this has been done for a worthy purpose, and your husband has not been enriched
thereby, you should understand that an action will not lie in your favor
against him.
Given on the third of the Idesof August, during the Consulate of the Caasars.
22. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Archinoa.
A husband can give a slave to his wife during marriage, with the intention of
manumitting him.
Given on the Kalends ofAugust, during the Consulate of the Caesars.
23. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Csecilianus.
If your mother-in-law placed you in possession of a certain tract of land as a
donation, either before or after your marriage, her change of mind will avail
nothing for the purpose of revoking the gift.
Given on the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of the Csesars.
24. The Emperors Constantine to Petronius Probinus.
Any property of a wife, which may have come into her possession through
inheritance, purchase, or the gift of her husband made before he was criminally
accused, if the latter should be condemned to death, or reduced to a servile
condition by way of penalty, shall remain intact; nor shall she be oppressed by
the misfortune of another's crime, as it is only just that she should, in
accordance with the laws, enjoy the property derived from her father or mother,
as well as that which she herself has acquired; and any donation made by the
husband before he was accused of crime, for the reason that it is regarded as
the recompense of modesty, should stand, just as if the course of nature, and
not punishment, had removed him.
When, however, he has been forbidden the use of water and fire, or has been
sentenced to deportation, and death did not result from the penalty, any
donations made by him to his wife will remain in abeyance, because in cases of
this kind the marriage is not dissolved; so that if the husband should not
revoke them during his lifetime, they will be confirmed by his death, and Our
Treasury will not afterwards have any claim upon such property.
Given on the second of the Kalendsof March, at Sardinia, during the second
Consulate of the Csesars Crispus and Constantius, 321.
Extract from Novel 22, Chapter Vill. Latin Text.
But, at the present day, no one originally well born can be rendered a slave by
way of punishment for crime, and therefore marriage is not dissolved for this
reason.
25. The Emperor Justinian to Menna, Prsetorian Prefect.
We order that donations made by parents for the benefit of their children of
either sex, who are under their control, or those made by a wife for the
benefit of her husband, or by a husband for the benefit of his wife, or by
either of them in behalf of a third party to whom it is not lawful to make a
donation during marriage, or for the benefit of any person to whom they cannot
make a donation, shall be rendered valid by the silence of the donor, if they
reach the amount authorized by law or exceed it, and have been recorded, for We
do not permit a donation of a larger sum than is legal to be recorded, or
confirmed by the silence of the person who made it.
When, however, the donor specifically confirms such donations by his or her
last will, they shall be considered as ratified without any distinction, so
that if they exceed the amount provided for by law, and have not been recorded,
their explicit confirmation shall be valid from the time when this took place.
But if the donation is not excessive, or if it is larger than is sanctioned by
law, and has been recorded, then the silence of the donor, and the special
confirmation by either him or her shall revert to the time when the donation
was made, just
as it is necessary to refer other ratifications of business matters to the date
of the execution of the contracts. Nor can any subtle distinction between law
and fact be introduced.
Given on the Idesof December, during the second Consulate of Our Lord, the
Emperor Justinian, 528.
26. The Same to Menna, Prsetorian Prefect.
We order that the donations which the Divine Emperor has made in favor of the
most pious Queen, his wife, and those which she has made in favor of her most
serene husband, shall immediately be valid, and be fully confirmed, for the
reason that Imperial Contracts take the place of laws, and require no external
assistance.
Given on the eighth of the Idesof April, during the Consulate of Decius, 529.
27. The Same to John, Prsetorian Prefect.
Where anyone who was united in marriage, after having made a donation for the
benefit of another, is taken by the enemy and reduced to slavery, and
subsequently dies in captivity, the question arose whether a gift of this kind,
which he had previously made, would be confirmed or weakened by this
occurrence. It was also asked if the donor should die in Roman territory, and
he who received the donation was in captivity at the time of his death, and
afterwards returned, whether the donation would then be held to have been
confirmed. Therefore, as in both these instances, the doubt should be removed
by an Imperial remedy---for there is nothing so peculiar to the majesty of the
Empire as humanity, by means of which alone the imitation of God is
preserved---We decree that, in both these cases, the donation shall be valid.
Given on the Kalendsof December, under the Consulate of Lam-padius and Orestes,
530.



* TITLE XVII.
CONCERNING REPUDIATION AND THE ABOLITION OP THE ACTION DE MoRiBus.1
1. The Emperor Alexander to Abutiniana.
Marriage is not dissolved by deportation or by the interdiction of water and
fire, if the state into which the husband has fallen does not
1 Little is known concerning the Actio de moribus mulieris,which was a personal
one of a penal character, in which the return of the dowry was involved. It was
resorted to in case of the criminality, infidelity, drunkenness, or other
serious misconduct of the wife, and the court was authorized to impose a fine
at his discretion. "Vir cum divortium fecit, mulieri judex pro censore est,
imperium quod videtur habet, si quid perverse tsetreque factum est a muliere,
multitatur; si vinum bibit, si cum alieno probri quid fecit, condempnatur."
(Aulus GelliusX, XXIII, 4.)
If the husband was aware of her character before he married her, he forfeited
all claim to the dowry.---ED.
alter the affection of the wife. Therefore the exaction of the dowry is not
competent by law, but neither the rules of equity nor any examples permit that
she whose attachment is worthy of praise should remain unendowed.
Given on the Nonesof November, during the Consulate of the Emperor Alexander,
Consul for the third time, and Dio, 230.
2. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus, and the Cassar Valerian to Paulina.
Your daughter is free to marry if, having waited for her betrothed for three
years, and all hope of this union having been lost, she does not think that she
should wait any longer, and thereby miss an opportunity for marriage, as, even
if the man is present and she should change her mind, she can serve notice on
him to that effect.
Given on the seventh of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of
.aCmilianus and Bassus, 260.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Tullius.
There is no doubt that everything transacted properly and after due
consideration is, by law and reason, rendered firm and valid. Wherefore, if you
gave a dowry for the benefit of a woman, and stipulated for its return at the
time of her death, and a fictitious repudiation has been made for the purpose
of deceiving you, and the marriage is rescinded for a short time, the Governor
of the province shall entertain no doubt that you are entitled to receive the
dotal property which you offered before the marriage, for it is certain that
the above-named official should see that whatever has been done contrary to
justice does not profit those who have resorted to cunning to evade the law,
for schemes of this kind are displeasing to Us.
It has also been decided by the ancient legal authorities that fictitious
notices, that is to say those of repudiation, are of no effect, whether the
parties pretend to have renounced either their marriage or betrothal.
Given on the second of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of the
same Emperors and Caesars.
4. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Piso.The divorce of a daughter is not under
control of her mother. Given on the third of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of the Caesars.
5. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Schyro.
Our Father, and most religious Emperor the Divine Marcus, decided that the
consent of a parent should not be considered as ratified where he gave his
consent to the marriage in the beginning and afterwards revoked it, and the
daughter under paternal control decided to remain with her husband, unless the
act of the father was caused by some good and sufficient reason. No rule of law
directs a wife to return to her husband against her consent. The father of an
emancipated daughter cannot, at will, authorize her divorce.
Given at Nicomedia, on the fifth of the Kalendsof September, during the
Consulate of the Caesars.
Extract from Novel 22, Chapter XIX. Latin Text.
And, on the other hand, a new constitution with reference to marriage sets
forth what is the law where the children subject to paternal authority desire
to be divorced against the wishes of their parents. That is to say, that
marriages shall not be dissolved to the injury of the parents, who either
alone, or along with their children, have offered or received a dowry, or an
ante-nuptial donation; for the reason that as the consent of parents is
required in contracting marriage, so, also, it is necessary for the purpose of
dissolving it.
6. The Same Emperors and Cassars to Phcebus.
Although the written notice of repudiation may not have been delivered to the
husband, or he may not have been aware of it, the marriage will, nevertheless,
be dissolved.
Given at Nicomedia, on the eighteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of the Caesars.
7. The Emperors Constantine to Dalmatius.
Awife who, after the lapse of four years from the time of the departure of her
husband for the army, has been unable to obtain any tidings of his safety, and
therefore is thinking of contracting another marriage, still should not do so
before sending notice of her intention to the general of the army, for then she
will not be considered to have contracted a clandestine marriage; nor will she
sustain the loss of her dowry, or be liable to capital punishment, who, when so
long a time has elapsed, is proved to have married, not rashly or stealthily,
but after a public announcement of her intention has been made. Therefore it
should be noted that, where no suspicion of adultery exists, and no clandestine
marriage is disclosed, no danger need be apprehended by those who have
contracted matrimony under such circumstances, since, if the marriage has been
knowingly and secretly violated, the law will impose the proper punishment.
Given during the Consulate of Felicianus and Titian, 337.
Extract from Novel 117, Chapter XI. Latin Text.
To-day, no matter how many years the husband may remain in the army, the wife
should be patient, although she may have received neither letters nor tidings
from him. If she hears that he is dead, she ought not to marry again before
either going herself, or sending someone to the officer under whom her husband
served, and interrogating him as to whether he is actually dead or not, so that
the said officer may swear in court that the husband is no longer living, which
having taken place, the woman may marry after a year has elapsed. If, however,
she should do so without taking this precaution, she, as well as the man who
marries her, shall be punished as guilty of adultery.
Where the person who took the oath is convicted of having sworn falsely, he
shall be dismissed from the army, and shall pay ten pounds of gold to him whom
he falsely stated to be dead, and the latter shall have permission to recover
his wife if he desires to do so.
8. The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian to Hormisdas, Prse-torian Prefect.
We decree that legal marriage may be contracted by consent, but this having
once been done, that it cannot be dissolved unless by notice of repudiation,
for the favor to which children are entitled demands that its dissolution
should be rendered more difficult.
(1) We clearly enumerate the causes of repudiation by this most salutary law,
for as We (with proper limitations) forbid marriage to be dissolved without
good cause, so that where one of the parties is compelled by necessity, or the
other is oppressed by some misfortune, We desire that he or she shall be
liberated by Our aid, when this becomes necessary.
(2) Therefore, if a woman should ascertain that her husband is an adulterer, a
homicide, a poisoner, or one who is plotting anything against Our government;
or has been convicted of perjury or forgery, or is a violator of sepulchres, or
has stolen anything from sacred buildings; or is a robber or a harborer of
robbers, a cattle thief or a kidnapper; or, in contempt of his house and of
her, or in her presence, has consorted with dissolute women (which is
especially exasperating to females who are chaste) ; or if he has attempted to
deprive her of life by poison, or by the sword, or in any other way; or if she
should prove that he had beaten her (which is not allowed in the case of
freeborn women), We then grant her permission to avail herself of the necessary
aid of repudiation, and to present legal reasons for divorce.
Extract from Novel 117, Chapter IX. Latin Text.
By the new law, however, a husband who has done this without any cause shall be
compelled to surrender to his wife, even during marriage, out of his other
property, an amount equal to the third part of the ante-nuptial donation which
he made, but the marriage shall not be dissolved on this account.
END OF THE EXTRACT.
THE TEXT OF THE CODE FOLLOWS.
(3) The husband, also, is controlled by similar restrictions, for he shall not
be permitted to repudiate his own wife, except for reasons which have been
clearly designated; nor can she be driven away under any circumstances, unless
he should find her to be an adulteress, a poisoner, a homicide, a kidnapper, a
violator of sepulchres; or one who has stolen something from sacred buildings;
or an accomplice of thieves; or one given to frequenting banquets where strange
men are present, her husband either being ignorant of the fact or having
withheld his consent; or where, without his permission, and without good
and reasonable cause, she has passed the night in some public resort, or
frequented the circus, theatre, or the exhibitions of the arena, in those
places in which they are usually conducted, in spite of his opposition; or if
she has attempted to kill him by poison, by the sword, or by any other means;
or where she is cognizant of any plots against Our government; or has been
implicated in the crime of forgery or perjury; or he can prove that she has
laid violent hands upon him. For, under these circumstances, We necessarily
grant him the right of separation, and the power to establish the causes of
divorce in accordance with the laws.
(4) If neither the husband nor the wife should observe these regulations, he or
she shall be punished with the avenging penalty of this most provident law. For
if a woman, in contempt of the law, should attempt to send a notice of
repudiation, she shall forfeit her dowry and her ante-nuptial donation, and
shall not have the power to marry again within five years, for it is just that,
in the meantime, she should be forbidden marriage, of which she has shown
herself unworthy.
If, however, she should marry in spite of this provision, she herself shall
become infamous, and We are unwilling that her union shall be designated
marriage, and, in addition to this, We grant authority to anyone to attack it
who desires to do so. But if she should prove the case which she has stated,
she shall then recover her dowry, and profit by her ante-nuptial donation; and
We decree that she shall have the right to claim them by law, and We grant her
permission to marry after the expiration of a year, in order that no doubt may
arise with reference to her offspring.
(5) We order by the following just regulation that the husband, also, who can
prove that his wife has attempted to commit unlawful acts, can claim not only
the dowry but also the ante-nuptial donation, and that he can immediately take
another wife, if he wishes. But if, on the other hand, he should merely desire
to repudiate his wife, he must return the dowry, and lose the ante-nuptial
donation.
(6) Where the crime of adultery or treason is alleged, the male and female
slaves of both the husband and wife who have 'reached puberty should be
subjected to torture for the purpose of ascertaining the cause of repudiation,
by which the truth may the more readily be ascertained, or more clearly
revealed, provided other sources of proof are lacking. We desire that the same
evidence shall be admitted in the case of wounds having been inflicted by
either of the parties (as has already been stated), since the truth of matters
which take place in the household is not easily established by the testimony of
strangers.
(7) If notice of repudiation is given and there are any children, either sons
or daughters living, We order that whatever was obtained by the marriage shall
be preserved for the benefit of the said sons or daughters, after the death of
the person who received it; that is to say, if the father should rashly serve
notice of repudiation, the antenuptial donation shall be preserved by the
mother; if the mother
should do so, the dowry, on the death of the father, shall be transferred to
the child, or children. Still, the father or mother will have the right to
appoint as heir or heirs one, or all of the children, or to make a donation of
his or her property to any one of them, in accordance with his or her choice.
We do not grant the power to alienate or substitute any of the above-mentioned
property. When, however, any of it is lacking, We order that it shall be made
good, either by the heirs, or by those having it in their possession (provided
the parties do not appoint any heirs, or the children who were appointed do not
enter upon the estate) so that, in this way, the children may not suffer injury
through the inconsiderate notice of repudiation.
(8) Where any agreements are made in opposition to Our present decree, We
desire they shall have no validity, as being contrary
to law.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof January, during the Consulate of
Protogenes and Astorius, 449.
9. The Emperor Anastasius to Theodore, Prsetorian Prefect.
Where a marriage has been dissolved by common consent, rather than by the
repudiation of the wife, and not on account of any cause included in the most
wise Constitution of the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian of Divine Memory,
the woman shall not be required to wait for the expiration of the term of five
years, but can contract a second marriage after the lapse of one year.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof March, during the second Consulate of
the Emperor Anastasius, 497.
Extract from Novel 117, Chapter X. Latin Text.
At the present time, a divorce of this kind cannot take place except where the
husband and wife desire to live in chastity, and under such circumstances the
dowry, as well as the ante-nuptial donation, shall be preserved for the benefit
of the children. If, however, the parties subsequently contract another
marriage, or are found to be living in debauchery, their property shall be
delivered to their children, and they shall lose control of the same. In case
there are no children, it shall be forfeited to the Treasury. Those who are
guilty of such offences shall be subjected to the penalties prescribed by law.
10. The Emperor Justinian to Menna, Pr&torian Prefect.
We add the following to the causes specifically enumerated by reason of which
repudiation can legally take place; namely, when a husband on account of
natural impotence is unable to have coition with his wife for two consecutive
years, from the beginning of the marriage, the wife, or her parents, can serve
notice of repudiation upon him, without risk of losing the dowry; provided,
however, that the ante-nuptial donation is preserved for the benefit of the
husband.1
1 The causes authorizing divorce in the different States of the Union are
almost innumerable. Few of them coincide, and with the exception of adultery,
not a single one is applicable everywhere. In addition to adultery, they
include
Given on the third of the Idesof December, during the second Consulate of Our
Lord Justinian, 528.
Extract from Novel 22, Chapter VI. Latin Text.
At the present day, We decree that instead of the term of two years, that of
three shall be reckoned from the time of cohabitation.
11. The Same to Hermogenes, Master of the Offices.
We order that where anyone has taken a wife with the consent of her parents,
or, if she had no parents, actuated by true marital affection, even if no dotal
instruments were drawn up, nor any dowry given, the marriage of the parties
shall be considered valid, just as if it had been accompanied with dotal
instruments; for marriages are not contracted by means of dowries but through
mutual attachment.
(1) When anyone desires to separate from a woman whom he married without a
dowry, he shall not be permitted to do so, unless some fault has been committed
which is condemned by Our laws. If, however, he should reject her without her
having been guilty of any fault, or he himself should commit such a fault
against an innocent woman, he shall be compelled to give her the fourth part of
his own property, in proportion to its amount; so that if he has an estate with
four hundred pounds of gold, or more, he must pay his wife a sum not exceeding
a hundred pounds of gold, and no more. If, however,
cruelty; insanity; failure to provide; ungovernable temper; desertion;
procuring of marriage by fraud or duress; conviction of felony; previous
divorce; sodomy; habitual drunkenness; notorious licentiousness of either party
before marriage; pre-marital pregnancy; concealment or contraction of venereal
disease; impotence, or sexual incapacity; existence of a former wife or
husband; lewd conduct of wife; attack by one party upon the other with
homicidal intent; disappearance without tidings for a specified term of years;
marriage within the degrees prohibited by law; refusal of the wife to change
her residence at the desire of the husband; violent behaviour rendering married
life intolerable; exclusion of the wife from the home; public defamation;
general disagreement; and gross neglect of duty, a provision of broad and ample
meaning, which of itself covers a multitude of marital sins.
Statistics show that within the last quarter of a century more than a half of a
million divorces have been obtained in this country. The so-called
"enfranchisement" of the sex, which is incompatible with home life and domestic
happiness, is mainly responsible for this condition, and by affording
opportunities that would have appeared incredible to the preceding generation,
has invested women with masculine qualities, enabled them to indulge their
predilection for dress to the point of extravagance, and facilitated indulgence
in dissipation of every kind, to the serious detriment of those distinguishing
characteristics and attributes which constitute the glory of the sex, and are
the chief source of its attractions. With the individuality of the husband,
formerly the head of the family, have disappeared the reserve, the gentleness,
the solicitude and the delicacy of the wife; instead of which we now have love
of notoriety, aspiration to public office, and the corruption and turmoil of
partisan politics. The physical nature of woman, utterly at variance with such
pursuits, the care of the household, the duties of maternity, are forgotten
amidst the homilies of the pulpit, the contests of the bar, the excitement of
electioneering, and the din of political controversy. The absolute unfitness of
the sex for these avocations is disclosed by the fact that no member of it has
ever become eminent in any profession, and few have even attained to
mediocrity.---ED.
his estate should amount to less than four hundred pounds of gold, then, a
calculation having been made, the fourth part of his property shall be given to
the wife, as the smallest amount to which she is entitled.
The same rule should be observed with reference to women who have not been
endowed, and who have repudiated their husbands, without the fault of the
latter, and contrary to law; or where they themselves have given cause for
divorce to husbands who were innocent, so that, on both sides, justice and the
punishment may be equally administered.
The benefit of the aforesaid share of the property shall be enjoyed by the
husband or the wife where there are no children, and shall be disposed of by
them in any way which they may desire. When there are children or descendants
of the latter by the said marriage, the property shall in every respect be
preserved by them, just as in the case of a dowry or a donation in
consideration of marriage, as has been previously decided with reference to the
same.
(2) We add to the causes of divorce of husbands and wives already enumerated by
the laws, the following; namely, if the wife should by her own efforts produce
an abortion; or if she should be so lascivious as to dare, for the sake of
debauchery, to bathe with other men; or, while she is still married, attempt to
take another husband. In cases of this kind, We decree that the law shall apply
which treats of the guilt of both husband and wife, so, just as a dowry or a
donation made in consideration of marriage is lost, in like manner, women who
have not been endowed shall run the risk of losing the fourth part which, by
the terms of this law, We have destined for husbands and wives.
The Actio de moribus,which was formerly inserted in ancient laws, but which was
not often resorted to, is hereby absolutely abolished.
We decree that none of the former causes for divorce, which were requisite and
set forth in ancient laws, except those which have been confirmed by the
present enactment, and those which the latter has introduced, shall be valid.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof December, during the second Consulate of
Our Lord, the Emperor Justinian, 528.



* TITLE XVIII.
IN WHAT WAY THE DOWRY CAN BE RECOVERED WHEN THE MARRIAGE HAS BEEN DISSOLVED.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Germilla.
After the dowry has been estimated, and an agreement or stipulation has been
entered into with reference to the same, there is no doubt that if the property
of which it is composed should be in existence at the time of the dissolution
of the marriage, it should be restored to the wife; and any female slaves,
together with their offspring,
which constitute part of the same, must also be returned by virtue of the
action based on the stipulation.
Given on the third of the Idesof April, under the Consulate of Lateranus and
Rufinus, 198.
2. The Same Emperors to Aquilia.
It is in accordance with the principle of the law that you think that your
dowry should be restored to you by the Treasury, which confiscated the property
of your father after his conviction. For although your father was the heir of
your former husband, still this cannot derogate from your rights, as your
father could neither exact nor receive your dowry without your consent.
Given on the day before the Nonesof April, during the Consulate of Aper and
Maximus, 208.
3. The Emperor Antoninus to Hostilia.
If, being ignorant of the condition of Eros, you married him and gave him a
dowry, as a freeman, and he afterwards was decided to be a slave, you can
recover your dowry out of his peculium,and anything else in addition which it
appears that he owes you. Your children, however, being born of a free woman,
but of a father whose status was uncertain, are understood to be illegitimate
freeborn children.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of Lsetus
and Cerealis, 216.
4. The Emperor Alexander to Apollonius.
The dowry provided by a father, where the woman dies in marriage while still
under paternal control, should be returned to him.
Given on the eighteenth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Fuscus and Dexter, 226.
5. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus, and the Csesar Valerian, to Taurus.
If your wife lives among enemies, her brother cannot yet, as her heir, claim
her dowry. If, however, she is dead, and he has a right to her estate, he can
also legally recover her dowry, as this was set forth in the stipulation.
Given on the second of the Nonesof May, during the Consulate of ^milianus and
Bassus, 360.
6. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Alexander and Nero.
If your mother has been deceived, and the dotal property has been appraised at
its true value, what has been decided with reference to a defect of this kind
in contracts is well known. Hence, if your mother has been misled as to the
appraisement of the dowry by the fraudulent artifices of her husband, and you
can prove this by conclusive evidence, before the Governor of the province, he
can, by his authority, grant you an exception on the ground of bad faith for
the purpose of obtaining the lands of which you are already in possession; and
he
will know to what extent to perform the duties of his judicial office. If,
however, after the truth has been ascertained, the husband should allege that
he has been injured by the appraisement, he cannot be compelled to return more
than the just price.
These rules apply when the property is in existence, but if it has been
destroyed, the sum stated in the dotal instrument must be adhered to.
Given on the eleventh of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors.
7. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Erotius.
You are not prohibited from depriving your daughter of money, if she is under
your control. Where, however, you have given her property as dowry, you cannot
do this during the existence of the marriage, if she does not give her consent;
nor, even after the marriage has been dissolved, can you claim the said
property if she is unwilling for you to do so.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof February, under the Consulate of the Csesars.
8. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Sallustia.
The husband (even though, after a divorce, he may have had judgment rendered
against him to the extent of his means) cannot refuse the payment of the
balance of the dowry, if he should after wards become solvent, provided he has
not already paid it in full. There is no doubt that his heirs can be sued for
the entire amount; and hence you, without good cause, apprehend that you cannot
bring suit against them, although they may be solvent.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of the
Csesars.
9. The Same Emperors and Caesars to Martia.
You should sue the heirs of your husband in an action of dowry to recover what
was given to him by way of dowry; but you have no right to take possession of
the dotal property without the authority of a competent court, if your
husband's heirs do not give their consent.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof November, under the Consulate of the
Csesars.
10. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Epigonus.
If you have given a dowry to the father-in-law of your daughter, although your
son-in-law may have died while under his father's control, the latter must
return the dowry to you, not merely to the extent of his son's peculium,but for
the entire amount, if you bring suit against him with the consent of your
daughter.
Given at Heraclea, on the seventh of the Idesof November, under the Consulate
of the Csesars.
11. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Marinianus, Praetorian Prefect.
When the husband dies during marriage, the dowry which is alleged to be given
or promised out of the property of the wife shall be returned to her, and the
heir of the deceased cannot claim for himself any of what the death of the
husband causes to revert to his wife.
Given at Ravenna, on the Nonesof December, during the Consulate of Honorius,
Consul for the eighth time, and Theodosius, Consul for the third time, 409.



* TITLE XIX. WHERE A DOWRY HAS BEEN PAID DURING MARRIAGE.
1. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Marinianus, Prse-torian Prefect.
Where the dowry was illegally given by the husband to the wife, during marriage
(which cannot stand, because it is considered a donation), and the wife dies,
the property, together with the profits of the same from the day when the dowry
was bestowed, must be delivered to the husband by her heirs.
The ownership of the same, however, vests in the children of the wife, and
cannot be alienated by the husband, as this would be contrary to law.
Given on the fifth of the Nonesof November, during the Consulate of Honorius,
Consul for the eighth time, and Theodosius, Consul for the third time, 409.



* TITLE XX.
NEITHER TRUSTEES NOR MANDATORS FOR DOWRIES SHALL BE APPOINTED.
1. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Cyne-gius, Praetorian
Prefect.
No matter whether the law providing that a husband shall furnish a surety for
the preservation of the dowry for his wife is derived from legal enactment, or
from custom, We direct that it shall be abolished.
Given on the eighth of the Nonesof September, during the Consulate of Eucherius
and Syagrius, 381.
2. The Emperor Justinian to Julian, Prsetorian Prefect.
For the purpose of extending the scope of the preceding constitution by a
general provision, We decree that no security or mandate with reference to a
dowry shall be exacted either from a husband or his father, or from any of
those who may have received it; for if the wife thought that she herself and
her dowry could be entrusted to her husband's father, why should a surety or
any other bondsman be
required, in order that reason for distrust might be introduced between the
parties during their marriage?
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof August, during the fifth Consulate of
Lampadius and Orestes, 530.



* TITLE XXI. CONCERNING PROPERTY SURREPTITIOUSLY REMOVED.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Polydeuca.
It is with justice that you assert the right of set-off, for it is only
equitable that you should not be obliged to pay what it is established that you
owe before an answer has been made to your claim for money loaned; and there is
all the more reason for this, because you allege that you are demanding
property which you complain has been removed on account of divorce. Therefore,
after you have been sued under the stipulation before a competent judge, you
must prove to him that the property taken formed part of the dowry, and that it
was
yours.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate
of Alexander, Consul for the third time, and Dio, 230.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Serenus.
An action for the recovery of property which has been fraudulently removed is
granted by the Perpetual Edict; where, in case of divorce, it has been taken by
the husband from the wife, or by the wife from the husband. Still, while
marriage exists, neither a penal action nor one involving infamy will lie
against either of the parties, but an action in factumfor indemnity is granted.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.
3. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Quartinus.
You are not prohibited from asserting ownership of the property which you
allege your former wife removed on account of the divorce, by bringing the
Actio perum amotarumagainst her successors, not, however, for the entire
amount, but only for as much of it as has come into their hands.
Given on the fifth of the Nonesof December, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.



* TITLE XXII.
THE ESTATE OF A HUSBAND CANNOT BE GIVEN TO A WOMAN INSTEAD OF HER DOWRY.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Apollinaria.It is prohibited by law
for the estate of a deceased husband to be given to his widow instead of dowry.
When, however, he died in-
solvent without leaving any heir, you will not be prevented from seeking
indemnification in accordance with the provisions of the law, to the extent
that the condition of the succession will permit.
Given on the fifth of the Nonesof December, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.



* TITLE XXIII. CONCERNING DOTAL LANDS.
1. The Emperor Severus and Antoninus to Didia.
Where lands which have been appraised are given by way of dowry, and the choice
of either the land or its value is reserved for the woman, the Lex Juliawill,
nevertheless, apply. Alienation is every act by means of which the ownership is
transferred.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Antoninus,
Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 213.
2. The Emperor Gordian to Domitia.
Husbands who have received as dowry land held in common with another, and which
has not been appraised, cannot bring suit in partition; although they
themselves can have an action of this kind brought against them.
Given on the fifth of the Nonesof October, during the Consulate of Gordian,
Consul for the second time, and Pompeianus, 242.



* TITLE XXIV.
WITH WHOM CHILDREN SHOULD RESIDE OR BE BROUGHT UP, WHEN A DIVORCE HAS TAKEN
PLACE.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Celestina,
Although it has not been provided by any of Our Constitutions, or by any of
those of Our Divine Ancestors, that a division of children should be made among
parents according to sex, a competent judge must decide whether the children
shall live with, and be brought up by their father, or their mother, after the
marriage has been dissolved.
Given at Verona, on the seventh of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of
the Csesars.
Extract from Novel 117, Chapter VII. Latin Text.
Where the father has given cause for divorce, the children shall be brought up
by the mother at his expense, if she has not contracted a second marriage.
Where, on the other hand, the mother is to blame, then the children shall be
reared by the father at the expense of the mother, if she is wealthy; for when
he has not sufficient means to care for them, and she has, this duty devolves
upon her. For, just as
children who are rich are compelled to provide their mother with a livelihood,
if she is poor, so We decree that it is but just that children shall be
supported by their mother. We order that what has been stated concerning a
mother and children who are without means shall also be observed with reference
to all ascending and descending relatives of both sexes.



* TITLE XXV.
CONCERNING THE SUPPORT OP CHILDREN AND RELATIVES IN THE ASCENDING LINE.
1. The Emperor Antoninus Pius to Bassus.
It is but just that children should relieve the necessities of their relatives
in the ascending line.
Without date, or designation of Consul.
2. The Divine Imperial Brothers to Celer.
A competent judge will order you to be supported by your son, if his means are
such that he can provide you with food.
Given on the Idesof April, during the Consulate of the same Emperors.
3. The Same Emperors to Titiana.
If you prove before a competent judge that the child which you allege was born
to you and Claudius is actually the son of the latter, he will order support to
be furnished him in accordance with the means of his father. The same judge
must decide whether the child shall be brought up by him.
Given at Rome, on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate
of Rusticus and Aquilinus.
4. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Sabinus.
If you have properly discharged the duties which you owe to your father, he
will not refuse you his paternal affection. If he should not do this
voluntarily, a competent judge, having been applied to, shall order him to
support you in proportion to his means. If, however, he denies that he is your
father, the same judge must, in the first place, investigate this point.
Given on the Nonesof February, during the Consulate of Lateranus
and Rufinus, 198.



* TITLE XXVI. CONCERNING CONCUBINES.
1. The Emperor Constantine to the People.
Permission is given to no one to have a concubine in his house during marriage.
Given on the eighteenth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of the
Constantines, Father and Son, 321.



* TITLE XXVII.
CONCERNING NATURAL CHILDREN AND THEIR MOTHERS, AND FOR WHAT REASONS THEY BECOME
LEGITIMATE.
1. The Emperor Constantine to Gregorius.
It is decided that Senators, or Prefects, and persons in the cities who have
been invested with the dignity of duumvirs, or with that of the priesthood
(that is to say, such as are attached to the government of Phoenicia or Syria),
shall be branded with infamy, and excluded from the protection of the Roman
law, if they give their consent to place among the number of legitimate persons
either the children of female slaves, or the daughter of a female slave; or a
freedwoman, or her daughter; or a public actress, or her daughter; or the
daughter of a tavern-keeper, or her daughter; or the offspring of anyone of low
and degraded social position; or the daughter of a procurer, or of a gladiator;
or that of a woman publicly engaged in business as a merchant; whether they do
this by their, own authority or by that of one of Our Rescripts. In case a
father should give anything to such children (whether he states that they are
legitimate or natural), it shall be taken from them, and delivered to his
lawful offspring, or to his brother, his sister, his father, or his mother. If
anything should in any way be bestowed upon a wife of this kind, or even
transferred to her by way of sale, We order that it shall be taken from her and
given to those legally entitled to it.
We also order that those women with whose poison the minds of ruined persons
are affected shall be subjected to torture; and if anything is demanded of
them, or is said to have been entrusted to them, it shall be restored to those
whom We have mentioned, or confiscated to Our Treasury. Therefore, whether the
donation was made either by him who is alleged to be the father, or by someone
else, or by an individual introduced for that purpose, or whether the property
has been purchased by him or by another, or in the names of the children
themselves, it shall immediately be restored to those whom We have designated;
and if no such persons are in existence, it shall be legally claimed by the
Treasury.
Where, however, such persons exist, and, with the property before them, decline
to act, they having been excluded either by agreement or by oath, the Treasury
shall take possession of all such said property without delay. When they remain
silent, or are guilty of dissimulation, the time for offering a defence to the
Treasury shall be limited to two months, within which period, if they do not
assert their claim, or apply to the Governor of the province for that purpose,
whatever an illegal generosity may have bestowed upon such children or wives
shall be seized by Our Treasury, which shall demand any such property which has
been donated or entrusted to them, under the severe penalty of quadruple
damages.
Given at Carthage, on the twelfth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate
of Nepotian and Facundus, 336.
Extract from Novel 127, Chapter IV. Latin Text.
By a new law, however, such women can contract marriage with men of every
description, even where they are incumbents of the aforesaid offices, provided
dotal instruments are executed for this purpose by persons of illustrious rank.
All others, with the exception of those who are invested with the highest
dignities, can contract marriage through affection alone, provided the women
with whom it is lawful for them to contract marriage are free.
2. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Antemonius, Praetorian Prefect.
Where the mother, or any legitimate children, grandchildren, or great-
grandchildren of either sex, to the number of one or more, are living, a father
can only give or leave one-twelfth of his estate to his natural sons or
daughters, or to their mother; or if only his concubine is living, he is
authorized to give or bequeath to her one-twelfth of his estate. Anything which
may be left beyond the amount prescribed by law shall go to his legitimate
children, or to their mother, or to his other heirs.
Given on the Idesof November, under the Consulate of Stilicho, Consul for the
second time, and Anthemius, 405.
Extract from Novel 89, Chapter XII. Latin Text.
At present, only natural and legitimate children are subject to this
limitation. This is not the case with the mother.
3. The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian to Apollonius, Prse-torian Prefect.
Where anyone has only natural children, whether he himself is free, or bound by
the restrictions of the curia,and he prefers to transfer his natural children
wholly or in part to the curiaof the city from which he himself derived his
origin, We grant him the power to do so, and to appoint them heirs to his
entire estate. If, however, a person who is not the native of a city but of a
village, or was born upon any tract of land whatsoever, should have natural
children, and desires them to be benefited by the honorable distinction of the
curia,as foresaid, and profit by their father's estate, they should be attached
to the city within whose jurisdiction the village or farm, which was the
birthplace of the father, is considered to be. But where the father claims as
his birthplace either of the two Imperial Cities, he shall be entitled to place
his children born out of wedlock among the decurions of either of them,
provided the one which he may select has jurisdiction over the entire province;
for it is disgraceful for anyone who boasts of being a native of a most Holy
City not to be able to give his natural children the benefit of a residence in
it; and this disposition the father can either make for the benefit of his
natural children by his last will, or by a donation of any amount whatsoever.
And what We have desired to be observed with reference to the rank of decurion,
whether it be conferred by will or by any other legal
document, We decree shall be observed as valid and established; so that if the
children abstain from accepting the estate, or reject the donations, and wish
to avoid the condition of decurion, and are afterwards found to be in
possession of the estate of their father, either wholly or in part, they shall,
by all means, be compelled to accept the position which their father desired
them to occupy with his wealth, even though they may have alienated the
property, and are unwilling to discharge the duties of the office.
Where, however, the father has a natural daughter or daughters, and disposes of
her or them in marriage to the decurions of the city in which he was born, or
upon which the village or farm where he derived his origin is dependent, or of
that city which has jurisdiction over the entire province, these regulations
shall, so far as the said children are concerned, apply, as in the case of a
husband. For what difference does it make whether cities are benefited by means
of sons or sons-in-law, or whether the law creates new decurions, or favors
those already in existence?
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of Eudoxius
and Dioscorus, 442.
4. The Emperors Leo and Anthemius to Armasius, Prsetorian Prefect.
As, not without good reason, We ascertain the desires of the dying from the
opinions of the living, so, where anyone, having a natural son, desires to have
him invested with the office of decurion for the purpose of making him
legitimate, and rendering him a citizen of his birthplace, he shows
unquestionably that, induced by paternal affection, he has selected him as the
successor to his entire estate. A person of this kind cannot, by virtue of the
Imperial Constitutions, be granted the power either of alienating or rejecting
the estate or donation of his father, for the purpose of defrauding the
curia;but he shall be compelled to accept the duties imposed upon him by the
will of his father; and We do not suffer that, in any way whatsoever, the
claims of calumnious persons shall be admitted, contrary to Our present
regulations; but We order that Philocalus himself, the heir at law of the
entire estate of his father, and attached to the curiaof Our city, shall
perform the duties which have been, or should be enjoined upon him; and that
any children whom he may now have, or who may hereafter be born to him, shall
likewise be subject to the condition imposed by his father.
We decree that this rule shall hereafter be observed in all cases which may
hereafter occur, no matter in what Order or curiaof any city.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of
Jordanus and Severus, 470.
5. The Emperor Zeno to Sebastian, Prsetorian Prefect.Renewing the most Sacred
Constitution of the Divine Constantine, who provided the Roman Empire with the
revered faith of the Chris-
tians, which Constitution had reference to the taking as concubines of freeborn
married women, and stated that any children born to them either before or after
marriage should be considered legitimate, We order that if those who, before
the promulgation of this law, had, without the ceremony of marriage, lived in
concubinage with freeborn women, and had children of either sex by them; the
latter shall not be considered legitimate, for the reason that their mothers
were not their father's wives. If, however, they should desire to marry the
women who were formerly their concubines, they can contract lawful matrimony
with freeborn women of this description, as previously stated; and the children
of both sexes begotten of the former union with the same women shall,
immediately after the marriage with their mothers has been celebrated, become
legitimate, and be under the control of their fathers, and shall succeed to the
entire estates of the latter along with those who may afterwards be begotten
during the said marriages, or alone; and, if no child should afterwards be
born, they can claim their estates not only under the last will of their
fathers, but also as heirs at law. And so far as any agreements which may have
been entered into during marriage with reference to dowries or ante-nuptial
donations, in which they themselves are interested are concerned, they shall,
none the less, be entitled to the benefit of the same, either alone (if no
other child has been begotten) or along with their brothers born to the same
parents, in accordance with the provisions of the laws.
Those, however, who, up to the time of the promulgation of this most Sacred
Decree, have had no issue by freeborn concubines, shall, by no means, enjoy the
benefit of this law; for as they are permitted to unite themselves in matrimony
with these women, when there are no free children or wives living, they can, by
marrying said women, beget lawful offspring; and persons who have had issue by
freeborn concubines, but have neglected to marry them after the promulgation of
this law, must not presume to urgently demand that their children shall
hereafter be considered legitimate.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Basilius,
Consul for the second time, and Armatius, 476.
6. The Emperor Anastasius to Sergius, Prsetoria/n Prefect.
We order that those who have no legitimate children living, and who at the
present time are keeping women instead of wives, shall consider any issue born
to them to be legitimate, and subject to their control; and that they can
transfer to them their private property by their last wills, by donations, or
by any other method recognized by law, if they should desire to do so.
We also decree that the said children shall be entitled to succeed to the
estates of their fathers, and that neither the agnates nor cognates of the
latter, nor anyone else, shall hereafter have the right .to raise any question
or dispute, by availing themselves of the subtleties of the laws or
constitutions, for the purpose of depriving them of the succession.
Nevertheless, where anyone keeps a woman of this
kind as a wife, and dotal instruments have been executed, the same rule shall
be observed with reference to his offspring, in order that, in no way, he may
be deprived of acquiring his own patrimony by means of his children.
In addition to this, We decree that any children who have, by virtue of
Imperial Rescripts, been arrogated by their fathers, shall enjoy the benefit
and assistance of this Our most salutary law.
Given on the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Anastasius, Consul for
the fourth time, and Agapitus, 508.
7. The Emperor Justin to Marinus, Prsetorian Prefect.
We decree that the law of Anastasius, of Divine memory, which was promulgated
with reference to natural children, shall only be valid in those cases which,
up to this time, have come under the terms of the same law with reference to
the marriages then existing, or which have subsequently been contracted;
provided, however, that it shall not be held to benefit children born of a
wicked or incestuous union. Moreover, We have decided, not without reason, that
relief should be afforded to children of both sexes who, not the issue of an
incestuous or wicked marriage, have, through the efforts of some woman, been
arrogated or adopted by virtue of an Imperial Rescript, whether before the said
law was promulgated, or afterwards, up to the present time; so that said
adoption or arrogation may be valid, and no question may be raised alleging
that what the parties have obtained was forbidden by some law; as mercy
dictates that, if any doubt on this point should arise, it ought not to be
entertained, for the reason that those who suffer from the faults of others are
not to blame. Therefore, children of this kind, after arrogation or adoption,
come under the control of their fathers, and are entitled to succeed to their
estates, not only as heirs at law, but also under a will.
Moreover, all persons are hereby notified that lawful posterity can only be
sought in legal marriage, just as if the above-mentioned Constitution had not
been published, for hereafter no excuse can be alleged for the unlawful desires
of libertinage. No encouragement shall be given for this purpose beyond what is
provided by the ancient laws, nor shall dependence any longer be placed upon
the aforesaid Constitution which Our pious judgment declares shall be repealed
from this day; nor shall the pretext of arrogation or adoption be advanced, as
these will no longer be tolerated; nor shall any subtleties or claims based
upon Imperial Rescripts be made use of, nor any dependence be placed upon
unlawful schemes; for it is extremely unworthy as well as wicked to demand
protection for vices in order that persons may be permitted to indulge their
wantonness, and claim for themselves, under color of law, the rights and name
of father which are legally denied them.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof November, during the Consulate of Justinus and
Euthericus, 519.
8. The Emperor Justinian to Menna, Prsetorian Prefect.
On the ground of humanity, We grant permission to the fathers of natural
children, when they have no legitimate offspring, or their mother is living, to
appoint their said natural child or children their heirs, not only to three-
twelfths of their estates (which former laws sanctioned), but to half, that is
to say, six-twelfths of the same. So that, although they have no claim as heirs
at law to the estate of their natural father, permission is given to them to
take by his last will as aforesaid six-twelfths of the same, if their natural
father is willing for them to do so; provided, however, that the testator does
not, under any circumstances, exceed the above-mentioned amount of six-
twelfths, in making bequests to all his natural children and their mother.
We also grant the natural father free permission to bequeath his estate to the
amount of six-twelfths, in legacies and trusts, as well as in dowries and
donations to his children begotten before marriage.
These provisions only apply to wills, bequests, dowries, and donations to be
given or made hereafter.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof January, during the second Consulate
of Our Lord, the Emperor Justinian, 528.
Extract from, Novel 89, Chapters XII, and XV. Latin Text.
A father who dies without leaving any children, or relatives in the ascending
line, to whom he would be required to bequeath his estate, can either transfer
all of it to his natural children by will, or can give it to them by a donation
inter vivos.Where only relatives in the ascending line survive him, he is
permitted, after leaving them the share to which they are legally entitled, to
distribute the remainder among his natural children. If, however, he leaves no
legitimate offspring, and is not survived by a lawful wife, and dies intestate,
but has natural children by a concubine, who was united to him solely by
undoubted affection, the said children shall succeed to two-twelfths of their
father's estate, and their mother shall receive her legitimate share of the
same, if she is living. For whether there are any surviving legitimate children
or not, or whether there are other heirs, and the wife is living, it is
necessary for natural children of this kind to be supported in accordance with
the judgment of a good citizen. Hence such children are required to furnish the
same service to their parents, if there is need of it; but those who are born
of an unlawful connection are excluded from all benefits whatever.
9. The Same to Menna, Prsetorian Prefect.
We, very properly being of the opinion that the public welfare demands that the
subjects of Our Empire should be governed by laws which are clear and free from
all ambiguity, do promulgate the following decree, by which all doubt
prevailing up to the present time having been removed, We establish it as
certain that, whenever natural children are assigned to the curiaof the
domicile of their father, during the lifetime of the latter, or even after his
death, they, in this manner, acquire a legitimate right to his estate; so that
(as is mani-
festly entirely just), even though the said natural children may have
previously attained to some illustrious dignity by which the condition of
decurion cannot be effaced, they shall not be permitted to claim for themselves
any rights to the estates of the ascendants or descendants of their said
natural father, or of any of his agnates or cognates through their relationship
to him; although they themselves, on account of the above-mentioned attachment
to the curia,become the lawful heirs of their natural father.
These provisions apply to those who have already been assigned by their natural
fathers to the condition of decurion, and are still living; and, in like
manner, none of the legitimate descendants, ascendants, or collateral relatives
can legally claim anything for themselves out of the estates of the said
natural children. Where, however, a natural child of this kind, having
subsequently been made the lawful heir of his father, whether he has children
formerly born in lawful marriage or has other issue descended from him, they
shall, by all means, be called to his succession without the execution of a
will by the deceased, and the rule relating to the curiashall not apply; but if
a fourth part of the estate should be due to the curia,none of the children of
the deceased can be compelled to discharge the duties of decurion. The rule
that any children which the said natural son may beget after he has been
assigned to the curia,will undoubtedly be born decurions, and be compelled to
discharge the duties of that office, must be observed.
(1) If, however, the decurion should die without leaving any children, and only
the mother should survive, she will be entitled to the third part of his
estate, and the curia,to whom the father has been attached shall have the other
two-thirds. If, however, the mother of the deceased should not be living,
others of her cognates, either of the descending or ascending lines, or in the
collateral line, shall be called to her succession; and then whatever property
came into the hands of the deceased through his natural father shall belong to
the same curia.But where, after a natural son has been rendered a lawful heir,
he has acquired anything from his mother, or from any other legitimate source,
this shall go to the nearest maternal cognates of the deceased.
The following rule must, however, be observed; namely, whether the mother is
living, or whether she died before her son, if anyone of the same family is
ready to attach himself to the same curia,,he will be permitted to receive the
property of the deceased which came into his hands from his father's estate,
and he shall discharge the duties of decurion; and when this takes place, the
mother of the deceased, if she is still living, shall not only be entitled to
the third part of the property which her son has acquired from other sources
than his father's estate, but she shall also receive all the property which
she, as sole heir, is entitled to, or she shall share the same with her
coheirs, if any there be.
(2) The rules which We have established with reference to the succession of a
natural son who dies after having obtained the position
of decurion, not only shall apply to those who were assigned to the curiaby
their natural father, but also to such as have previously been assigned to it,
if they are still living. Where, however, they have died before the
promulgation of the present law, We do not include their succession in its
provisions.
(3) And, since the curiasof cities should, by all means, be favored, We order
that the following shall be added to what has preceded it, namely, that it
shall be lawful for fathers to attach their natural sons to the curiseof their
places of residence, not only where they have no lawful children living, but
also where they have any sons or other descendants by a lawful marriage, and
that by this means their natural children shall also become their lawful
successors; provided, however, that they shall, by no means, be permitted to
give or leave either by donation or by last will to a natural child any more
than they may have given or left to a child born in lawful marriage, to whom
the smallest share has been either donated or bequeathed.
Given on the Kalendsof June, during the second Consulate of Our Lord Justinian,
528.
10. The Same to Demosthenes, Prsetorian Prefect.
Where anyone has lived for a time in the pleasant society of a free woman with
whom marriage is not forbidden by the laws, and has children by her, without
any dotal instruments having been drawn up, and afterwards, induced by the same
affection, he marries her, and begets other children after the marriage, in
order to prevent the latter, being legitimate and under his control, from
claiming for themselves the entire estate of their father, thereby excluding
their brothers, who were born before the marriage, from sharing in the estate,
We decree that injustice of this kind shall not be tolerated. For as affection
for the first offspring was instrumental in bringing about the marriage, and
gave occasion to the birth of the more recent children, why is it not most
inequitable for the offspring born after marriage to exclude the others, when
the former should be grateful to their brothers through whose means they
themselves have become legitimate, and have obtained the name and standing of
children of this description? For it is not probable that the man who
afterwards made a donation, or gave a dowry to a woman of this kind, did not
from the beginning entertain for her sufficient affection to consider her
worthy of being his wife. Wherefore, We decree that in such cases all children,
whether they have been born before marriage or subsequently, shall be equal in
every respect; that all those belonging to the father shall be held to be under
his control; and that no distinction shall exist between the former and the
latter, but that all who are the issue of the same marriage shall enjoy similar
advantages.
Given at Chalcedon, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof October, during the
Consulate of Decius, 529.
11. The Same to Julian, Prsetorian Prefect.
We formerly promulgated a law by which We ordered that if anyone should live
with a woman without having for her the attachment
of a husband from the beginning (provided she was one with whom lawful marriage
could be contracted), and he should have children by her, and afterwards,
induced by affection, should marry her, and have other sons and daughters by
her, not only the second children who were born after marriage shall be
legitimate, and under paternal control, but also those previously born, who
have afforded those who came into the world subsequently the opportunity of
obtaining legitimacy.
Certain authorities have held that this law should be interpreted in such a way
that if any children were born after the marriage, or even if there were some
who had died, those born previously should not be considered legitimate, unless
the children born under these different conditions should be living at the same
time. We decree that excessive subtlety of this description shall be absolutely
disregarded, as it is sufficient for a man to have sufficient affection after
the birth of children to induce him to execute an instrument of marriage with
the hope of having others. For even though what was hoped for may not have
taken place, an accidental circumstance should, by no means, be conceded to
derogate from the rights of children previously born. Where anyone has been
living with a woman and causes her to become pregnant, and subsequently, while
she is still in this condition, enters into a contract of marriage with her,
and a boy or girl is born, a much better reason exists that this offspring
should be the legal issue of the father, be brought under his control, and be
his heir in case of his death, whether he dies testate or intestate. For it
would be extremely absurd if children born after marriage should confer the
benefit of legitimacy upon others previously born, and that a boy or girl of
this kind could not secure this advantage for themselves.
And, generally speaking, with reference to the various opinions given in such
cases, We decree, and include in a definite provision -that, always, under such
circumstances, where any doubt exists as to the status of children, the time of
their birth, and not that of their conception, should be taken into account.
This We do in order to favor children by providing that the date of birth
should be considered, except in those instances in which the welfare of infants
demands that the time of conception should rather be noted.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof April, during the fifth Consulate of
Lampadius and Orestes, 530.
Extract from Novel 12, Chapter III. Latin Text.
This rule shall also apply where a father, previous to this union, had
legitimate children by another wife from whom he has been legally separated, or
where she is dead.
Extract from Novel 18, Last Chapter. Latin Text.
Anew constitution, however, does not permit this rule to apply to the case of a
female slave, unless where a man has no other children who are legitimate.
Extract from Novel 78, Chapter HI. Latin Text.
Another new constitution is considered generally to provide with regard to the
children of a female slave that, by the sole fact of the bestowal of a dowry,
she, as well as her offspring, will receive their freedom.
Extract from Novel 74- Latin Text.
Moreover, anyone who has no legitimate offspring, but only natural children the
issue of a union of this description, can, by presenting a petition to the
Emperor, render them legitimate, even without marriage, if the woman is already
dead, or if she has left him, or remains concealed, or for any other reason is
prevented from appearing, or where some impediment to matrimony exists, as for
instance, the priesthood.
Extract from Novel 74, Chapter II. Latin Text.
Likewise, where a man dies without leaving legitimate offspring, and states in
his will that he wishes his natural children to be his lawful heirs, he shall
be permitted to do this, so that, after his death, the said children may
petition the Emperor, and, after having produced the will, they can become the
heirs through the indulgence of the sovereign and the law, provided they carry
out the provisions of their father's will. This rule shall generally be
observed. If, however, some of them desire to become legitimate, and others do
not, the wishes of the first shall be granted, and the others shall remain in
their condition of natural children.
Extract from Novel 13, Chapter II. Latin Text.
Where anyone who has natural children by a free woman capable of being his wife
who states either in a public document or in one drawn up in his own hand and
subscribed by three witnesses worthy of confidence, or says in his will or in
any instrument, that such-and-such children are his, and does not use the term
"natural," offspring of this kind shall be his lawful heirs; and if, to any one
of the said children, he should make a statement in the manner above mentioned,
it will be sufficient to confer the rights of legitimacy upon all others born
of the same woman.
12. The Same-to John, Prsetorian Prefect.
A man, who had a legitimate son, had a natural grandson by the latter, and the
question arose whether the name of grandson could legally be given to a child
of this kind, for the grandfather desired to leave his entire estate to this
grandson, his legitimate son, the father of the latter, having died; as it was
only prohibited by the Sacred Constitutions that the entire inheritance, or
such a part as 'he desired to leave them, should be left to natural children,
and at .the same time their interest was limited to a certain amount.
A doubt of this kind gives rise to another, for what would be the case where a
grandfather has either a legitimate grandson or a
natural grandson by a natural son? Hence, as in all ambiguous questions of this
kind, no definite conclusion can be arrived at with reference to such persons,
and by the introduction of natural offspring no legal right can arise; to the
end that the necessity of leaving something to them may be provided for by the
laws, they shall be permitted to bestow upon these descendants as much of their
estates as they may desire (of course, where there is no legitimate issue
living). For the Imperial Constitutions prohibited that as much should be left
to natural children as their parents might desire to give them, because they
considered that, by so doing, the debauchery of their fathers could be
restrained.
With reference to grandchildren, however, the rule in the instance above
mentioned should not be observed, where there is no legitimate offspring to
offer an impediment. But where such offspring exists, We extend the provisions
of the ancient constitutions, which have been established concerning natural
sons, to grandsons, as well; but We decree that they shall only apply to those
who can obtain a share in their grandfather's estate by virtue of his will, for
We do not allow any of them to become his heirs at law.
We decree that they shall not only have the benefit of the estate of their
natural paternal grandfather, but also those of their greatgrandfather, and of
his cognates; if anyone should desire to apply this term to men of such
degenerate character.
Given during the Kalendsof November, during the fifth Consulate of Lampadius
and Orestes, 530.



* TITLE XXVIII. CONCERNING TESTAMENTARY GUARDIANSHIP.
1. The Emperor Severus and Antoninus to Sperata.
The person whom you state was appointed guardian for you by the will of your
patroness is not liable to you in any action, if he did not interfere in the
administration of the guardianship, for he was not legally appointed your
guardian. Where, however, he, of his own accord, transacted your business, you
can proceed against him in an action based on voluntary agency.
Given on the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Asper and Maximus, 208.
2. The Emperor Antoninus to Sabinianus.
Although the guardian who was legally appointed for you by your father's will
was living at the time when you became his heir, still, as another was also
legally appointed for you by a codicil, both of-them will be your guardians
under the will of the testator; unless your father revoked the testamentary
appointment by designating the other mentioned in the codicil, for then the
latter alone will be your guardian.
Given on the Idesof April, under the Consulate of the Aspers, 213.
3. The Emperor Alexander to Gordius and Others.
Where testamentary guardians are appointed for you, even though one of you may
have attained his majority, that is to say, have passed the period of tutelage,
your guardianship will not belong
to him.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Julianus, 224.
4. The Same to Feliciana.
A mother cannot appoint guardians for her children unless she has made them her
heirs. However, when she has not designated them as her heirs, it is customary
for the testamentary guardian to be confirmed by the Governor. Where, however,
none of these things take place, and the testamentary guardians have
administered the affairs of the trust, they will be liable in an action of
guardianship.
Given on the seventh of the Kalendsof June, during the Consulate of Julian,
Consul for the second time, and Crispinus, 225.
5. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to Daphna.
If the father of certain minors desired that a slave belonging to another, with
reference to whom you petition, should become the guardian of said minors, and
be free, another guardian previously appointed retaining his office in the
meantime, it will be necessary for the said slave to be purchased and
manumitted in the presence of the Governor, and be added to the administration
as curator.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Secularis
and Donatus, 261.
6. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Domna.
If your father legally appointed your uncle your guardian by will, and he was
not excused, an action of guardianship can be brought against him, not only
with reference to the affairs which he administered, but also on account of
what he neglected (and which he Should have administered), before a competent
judge, who shall order that satisfaction be given you in accordance with good
faith.
Given on the Nonesof April, during the Consulate of the CaBsars.
7. The Same, and the Csesars, to Triphena.
As you intend to proceed in an action against the guardian appointed for you by
the will of your father, under whose control you were, a competent judge,
having been applied to, will order anything due to you to be paid; for there is
no doubt that a curator cannot be appointed by will.
Given on the seventeenth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of the
Csesars.
8. The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian to Florentius, Prse-torian Prefect.
It is legal for testamentary guardians to be appointed in the Greek language,
so that those appointed in this manner may be
considered to have been appointed by the testator in terms authorized by law.
Given on the day before the Idesof September, during the Consulate of
Theodosius, Consul for the fourteenth time, and Maximus, 439.



* TITLE XXIX. CONCERNING THE CONFIRMATION OF A GUARDIAN.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Prisons.
Guardians appointed by the will of the mother have no reason to be excused,
unless, after proper examination, they are found to have also been appointed by
a decree in accordance with the will of the deceased.
Given on the third of the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of Julian, Consul
for the second time, and Crispinus, 225.
2. The Same to Valerius.
There is no doubt that a guardian cannot legally be appointed either by a
letter, or by an imperfect testament, but the wishes of the father with
reference to the appointment of guardians or curators, in cases of this kind,
is accustomed to be observed by the judge who has jurisdiction of such matters.
In accordance with which, you should be under no apprehension that the
prescribed time has expired before you have been confirmed.
Given on the eighth of the Idesof August, during the Consulate of Alexander,
Consul for the second time, and Marcellus, 217.
3. The Same to Sossianus, Prsetorian Prefect.
If (as you allege) your father illegally appointed testamentary guardians for
the minor whom you have mentioned, and that, before they were confirmed, others
were also appointed by someone who" had the right to do so, what was properly
done by law cannot be revoked; but a competent judge, having been applied to,
will decide, in accordance with the welfare of the minor, whether the guardians
appointed by the will of the father should be appointed his curators.
Given on the third of the Idesof April, during the Consulate of Modestus and
Probus, 229.
4. The Emperor Justinian to Julian, Prsetorian Prefect.
With a view to providing for the welfare of natural children, We grant
permission to their fathers to appoint guardians for them, to insure the
administration of such property as they may have given or bequeathed them in
any manner whatsoever; provided this is done within the limits prescribed by
Our laws, and the said guardians are confirmed by a competent judge, and then
administer the affairs of the guardianship.
Given at Constantinople, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof April, during the
Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes, 530.



* TITLE XXX. CONCERNING LEGAL GUARDIANSHIPS.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Firmina.
The guardianship of males is not granted to maternal uncles by the Laws of the
Twelve Tables, but this right is accorded to paternal uncles if they are not
excused.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof June, during the Consulate of Diocletian,
Consul for the fourth time, and Maximian, Consul for the third time, 290.
Extract from Novel 118, Chapter V. Latin Text.
As the right of inheritance is conceded to relatives without taking agnation
into account, so also is the burden and benefit of guardianship granted to
relatives, provided they are of the male sex and of full age, and are not
forbidden by any law to undertake it. Where, however, there are several
relatives of the same degree, and they are called to the guardianship, We order
that, when one or more of them is present in court, a choice shall be made. The
guardianship should be committed to him or them who are the best qualified to
attend to it; responsibility attaching to all called to its administration and
their property being tacitly encumbered to their wards to secure the proper
management of the trust.
2. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Asclepiodotus.
It is perfectly clear that the administration of guardianship legally belongs
to the agnates of the minor, unless they have undergone a change of condition.
Given on the third of the Nonesof April, during the Consulate of the same
Emperors.
3. The Emperor Leo to Erythrius, Prsetorian Prefect.
The Lex Claudiahaving been abrogated by a Constitution of the Emperor
Constantine, of Divine Memory, and the right of agnation remaining unimpaired
by virtue of the authority of the ancient law, the blood-relatives, that is to
say, the brother, as well as the paternal uncle and the other kindred legally
authorized, are called to the guardianship of females.
Given on the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Martian and Zeno, 469.
4. The Emperor Anastasius to Polycarp, Prsetorian Prefect.
An emancipated man who, by Our present law, in the succession to his brother's
or sister's estate is ordered to take precedence of all other cognates and
agnates of inferior or more distant relationship, shall also be called to the
legal guardianship of his brothers and sisters, as well as to that of their
children, although he has been liberated from the control of his father by
emancipation, unless he can avail
himself of some other excuse provided by law; for We are not willing for him to
claim that under this pretext he is released from the administration of the
guardianship.
Given on the Kalendsof April, under the Consulate of John and Paulinus, 498.
5. The Emperor Justinian to Demosthenes, Praetorian Prefect.
No brother, nor any other relative authorized by law, shall be called to the
guardianship of either a freeborn person or a freedman before he has completed
his twenty-fifth year; for each person must be liable only for his own
administration, to prevent one from being burdened with the charges of another.
For in this way both minors and adults will be subjected to proper
guardianship, and the natural order will be reserved in every respect. How can
it be tolerated that anyone should be a guardian, and at the same time subject
to guardianship, or that the same individual should be a curator, while he
himself is under tutelage? This is indeed an abominable confusion of names and
things. All these matters are distinct, and testamentary or legal guardians or
curators must be of such an age as to be competent for the management of their
own affairs, and have all their property liable to hypothecation.
All those provisions which have been established by former laws with reference
to the succession of freeborn persons, as well as freedmen, shall remain in
full force, and shall not, in any way, be demin-ished in efficiency by the
operation of the present law; and this particularly applies to the inheritances
of freedmen, in order that they may not appear to lose the advantage of
succession, for the reason that they do not assume the burden of guardianship.
Read seven times in the new Consistory of the Palace of Justinian.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof November, during the fifth Consulate of
Decius, 539.



* TITLE XXXI.
CONCERNING THOSE WHO DEMAND GUARDIANS OR CURATORS.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Chrysantha.
Notify the young man against whom you wish to appear to demand that curators be
appointed for himself, with whom you can confer in accordance with the forms of
law. If, however, he should not make this demand, you can apply to a competent
judge, and he must perform his duty, and appoint curators.
Given on the second of the Nonesof February, during the Consulate of Messala
and Sabinus, 215.
2. The Same to Epaphroditus.
If your patron's children are of such an age that their affairs should be
administered by guardians, be sure to appear before the
Praetor, and give him the names of those for whom guardians ought to be
appointed; and if you fail to do so, you will run the risk of being punished
for your neglect of duty to your patron.
Given on the Nonesof July, during the Consulate of Messala and Sabinus, 215.
3. The Same to Atalanta.
Ask a competent judge to appoint a capable guardian for your children, who is a
resident of the same province, instead of the one that is deceased, or has been
banished for life, who, in accordance with his duty, will provide for their
welfare.
Given on the fourth of the Idesof July, during the Consulate of Lsetus, Consul
for the second time, and Cerealis, 216.
4. The Same to Domninus.
If there are no near relatives who can demand that guardians be appointed for
the children of your debtor, you yourself can take measures for that purpose,
in order that the said children may be legally defended.
Given on the third of the Idesof July, during the Consulate of Lsetus, Consul
for the second time, and Cerealis, 216.
5. The Emperor Alexander to Fusciana.
A maternal aunt is not forbidden to petition for guardians to be appointed for
the children of her brother.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Julianus, 224.
6. The Same to Otacilia.
Maternal affection will suggest to you whom you should ask to have appointed
guardians for your son, and it should also induce you to see that nothing but
what is proper is done in the administration of the affairs of your minor
child. However, the necessity of demanding curators for their sons is not
imposed upon mothers, as minors who have arrived at puberty, but are under
twenty-five years of age, can petition to have curators appointed for
themselves, if their affairs
require it.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Julian,
Consul for the second time, and Crispinus, 225.
7. The Emperor Gordian to Dionysius.
Notify her, who was formerly your ward, to ask that a curator be appointed for
herself, as she has not yet arrived at puberty, and you intend to give her in
marriage. If she should neglect to do this, you will not be prevented from
demanding a curator before a judge having jurisdiction of such matters, in
order that you may be able the more readily to render an account of your
administration.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof January, during the Consulship of Gordian and
Aviola, 240.
8. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Musicus.
As the positive duty of demanding guardians for their children is imposed upon
mothers who are not to be held liable for fortuitous occurrences, and you state
that an attorney who was appointed by the mother for the purpose of applying
for a guardian for her minor son was killed by robbers, and the demand was
postponed on account of this accident, it would be exceedingly unjust for the
mother to be excluded from the succession of the estate of her son, as you
assert that she was in no way responsible for the delay.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Tiberian and
Dio, 291.
9. The Same Emperors to Asclepiodotus.
As a guardian cannot be appointed for a person who already has one, you will
understand that the mother has not neglected her duty as a parent, in demanding
the appointment, but that she cannot reasonably ask that a guardian be
appointed where her son has already been legally provided with one.
Given at Byzantium, on the third of the Nonesof April, under the Consulate of
the same Emperors.
10. The Same Emperors and Csssars to Prisons.
You can formally petition for guardians to be appointed for the grandsons of
your brother, if their mother does not perform her duty by making such an
application.
Given on the day before the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of the Caesars.
11. The Emperor Zeno to Dioscorus, Prsetorian Prefect.
Mothers shall be subjected to the necessity of demanding the appointment of
guardians for their natural children, just as in the case of those who are born
in lawful wedlock, and neither ignorance of the law, nor its assumption for the
purpose of evading the Imperial Constitutions, will profit them, if they should
fail to apply for such an appointment.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Zeno, Consul for the second time, 479.



* TITLE XXXII.
WHERE A PETITION MUST BE MADE FOE THE APPOINTMENT OF GUARDIANS OR CURATORS.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Aristobula.
The magistrates of the town from which your children derive their origin
through their father, or where their property is situated, must see that
guardians or curators are appointed for them at once, in accordance with the
provisions of the law. If, however, your children do not possess any property
in the province where they reside, and do
not derive their paternal origin therefrom, they must return to their own
country, or the place where their patrimony is situated, and establish their
residence there, and legal defenders will, then be appointed for them.
Given on the Kalendsof October, during the Consulship of Lsetus, Consul for the
second time, and Cerealis, 216.



* TITLE XXXIII.
CONCERNING THE GUARDIANS AND CURATORS OF ILLUSTRIOUS OR DISTINGUISHED PERSONS.
1. The Emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius, to Proculus, Prefect of
the City.
Let the Prefect of the City, after having associated with himself ten men taken
from among the senators, together with the distinguished Praetor, who has
jurisdiction over matters relating to guardianships, appoint illustrious
persons of any rank whatsoever, who are properly qualified, guardians or
curators; and let them, as judges and experts, freely make such appointments
without liability for any damages which may result from their acts. And if any
of those who are eligible are not equal to the management of the property of
the wards, it is proper that several be designated for this purpose in
accordance with the ancient laws; so that he whom the assembly determines to be
most worthy of administering the guardianship of said wards may obtain the
appointment by the sole decision of the Prefect; and after all the formalities
have been complied with, the decree shall be issued by the Praetor. Therefore,
all those who were present will be free from apprehension, and a just defence
will be provided for the noble children and adults by the deliberation of these
learned men.
It is, however, evident that We have established this regulation with reference
to persons who have neither testamentary nor legal defenders to protect their
lives, their age, or their property. Where men of this kind are appointed, and
take no action for the defence of the rights of their wards, We prescribe by
law that they can be held liable. We also decree that everything else which has
been provided by former laws with reference to the cases of minors shall remain
unaltered.
In the provinces governed by decurions, where guardians and curators are to be
appointed for noble persons, they must give proper security, and, mindful of
the risk they run, recognize that the property shall hereafter be liable to
indemnify the said minors for any losses which they may sustain.
Given at Milan, on the third of the Kalendsof January, under the Consulate of
Timasius and Promotus, 389.
2. The Emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius to Aure-lian, Prefect of
the City.
It is provided by this general law that decurions, occupied with the duties of
their office, shall not be called to the guardianship of senators.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of
Theodosius, Consul for the third time, and Abundantius, 393.



* TITLE XXXIV.
WHO CAN APPOINT GUARDIANS AND CURATORS AND WHO CANNOT BE APPOINTED.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Amphibulus.
As you are at such an age that it is clear that your affairs should be
administered by guardians or curators, for the reason that you allege that a
dispute has arisen with reference to your freedom, it is not necessary for an
obstacle to be placed in the way of the appointment of a curator, by whom your
case may be defended, because in the meantime you are considered to be free.
Given on the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of Alexander, 223.
2. The Same to Arthemisia.
Although a husband should attend to the business of his wife, still, he cannot
have a curator appointed for her.
Given on the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Fuscus, Consul for the
second time, and Dexter, 226.
3. The Emperor Philip- to Dolens.
The statement made to you that a curator should be appointed for one who is
blind is false.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of
Peregrinus and ^Emilianus, 245.
4. The Same to Emeritus.
A soldier engaged in the performance of military duties cannot be appointed a
guardian or a curator, whether he is legally entitled to hold the office, or
has been designated by will, or in any other way, even though he may consent.
When, however, being unaware of his incapacity, he administers the office, he
will be liable to an action on the ground of business transacted.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Peregrinus
and ^milianus, 245.
5. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Ctesars, to .zEmiliana.
It is a certain rule of law that a person who is born in another state, and who
does not have his domicile where he is named, cannot legally be appointed a
guardian by the Governor of another province, or by the municipal magistrates
of the same, when he is not subject to their jurisdiction. Hence, when he
ceases to discharge the duties of the office wrongfully imposed upon him, this
does not render him liable.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.
6. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Leontius.
Apply to the Governor of the province for the decision of the question referred
to, namely, that a mother refuses to demand guardians for her children; and if
he ascertains that she has neglected her duty, the said magistrate will not be
prevented from appointing guardians, or he can order the names of persons to be
presented to him, so they can be confirmed by his decree.
Given on the second of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.
7. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Rufus.
There is no doubt that a guardian or curator cannot legally be appointed by a
Governor for a person of servile condition.
Given at Philippopolis, on the second of the Nonesof July, during the Consulate
of the same Emperors.
8. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Evelpistus.
There is no doubt that when a creditor is appointed the guardian of his
debtors, he not only loses his right of action against them, but that also he
can pay himself.
Given on the fifth of the Nonesof June, during the Consulate of the Caesars.
Extract from Novel 72, Chapter II. Latin Text.
The debtor of a minor, or one to whom a minor is liable, or one who has the
property of the latter in his possession, is prohibited from acting as his
curator. If a curator should subsequently become the creditor of the minor, he
cannot administer his affairs without the addition of another curator; for, in
this instance, he who is appointed must either prove or swear in the beginning
that the minor is indebted to him, or that his property is in his possession.
If he remains silent, he shall lose his right of action. Likewise, if the
debtor remains silent, he will not be entitled to rescind his contract, or pay
the debt during the existence of the curatorship. If, however, the curator
receives the assignment of an action against the minor, he will not be
permitted to make use of it, even after the expiration of his term of office;
nor can the person who assigned it to him bring suit, as he has violated the
law, although the assignment may have been made for just reasons; but the minor
will be pecuniarily benefited.
These provisions are valid, and apply to every curatorship, including those of
spendthrifts and insane or demented persons, as well as to all others
introduced by the laws.
9. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Maximian.
If you have been appointed guardian of your sister's children whose paternal
uncle has already been made their guardian, and who has not
yet claimed any privilege of exemption, there is no doubt that, as the minors
already have a guardian, the laws forbid another to be appointed, and that the
former must discharge the duties of the administration ; and you will not be
liable under the said appointment.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of the
Caesars.
10. The Same Emperors and Csesars to the Soldier Florentinus.
There is no doubt in law that a curator cannot be added when the person in
question already has one, unless where proper cause is shown; and one cannot be
substituted instead of another, if the latter . has not previously been
removed. Therefore, you will be liable for the injury sustained by the business
of your wards in the meantime, as you should have appointed an agent to act in
your stead at your own risk; since it is certain that a magistrate cannot
appoint another curator to act for you during your absence.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of the Caesars.
11. The Emperor Constantius, and the C&sar Constantine, to Bassus, Prefect of
the City.
It is decreed that, in all kinds of actions, no one can appear in court before
he reaches the age of puberty, unless by a special decree, or where a curator
has been appointed for the purpose of administering his patrimony, or conduct
the litigation, in order that any disputes which may arise during the course of
the proceedings may be terminated promptly in accordance with law.
Given at Aquileia, on the third of the Idesof October, during the Consulate of
Constantius and Licinius, 312.
12. The Emperors Valentinian, Gratian, and Theodosius to Eutro-pius, Prsetorian
Prefect.
A curator appointed for a minor cannot abandon a case after issue has been
joined, or withdraw from the administration of the trust under the pretext
that, after the suit was commenced, a special curator to conduct it was
appointed by himself.
Given at Constantinople, on the fourth of the Kalendsof October, during the
Consulate of Eucherius and Syagrius, 381.
13. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Monaxius, Urban Prefect.
In order that the authority of magistrates may not be exceeded, We give notice
that no tenant of the Emperor, nor anyone else who has a right to protect
himself by special privilege from such an appointment, shall be compelled to
discharge the duties of guardianship.
Given during the Consulate of Honorius, Consul for the eighth time, and
Theodosius, Consul for the third time, 409.
235



* TITLE XXXV.
WHEN A WOMAN CAN DISCHARGE THE DUTIES OF GUARDIANSHIP.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Otacilia.
It is the privilege of men to administer the office of guardian, as duties of
this kind cannot be undertaken by women on account of the weakness of their
sex.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Julian,
Consul for the second time, and Crispinus, 409.
2. The Emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius to Tatian, Praetorian
Prefect.
Mothers who, after the death of their husbands, petition for the guardianship
of their children and the administration of their affairs, must, before they
are confirmed in office in accordance with law, state solemnly in writing under
oath that they will not marry again. No woman, however, shall be forced to
accept an office of this kind, but shall be free to do so under the conditions
which We have established; for if she prefers to contract a second marriage,
she should not administer the guardianship. But in order that it may not be
easy for her to violate her obligations, after she has once undertaken the
legal guardianship, We order that the property of the husband who married her
while she was administering it shall become encumbered, and be liable to the
little children in order that none of their property may be lost by neglect or
fraud.
We add to these provisions that if the woman is of full age, she shall have the
right to demand the guardianship, when either a testamentary or a legal
guardian is lacking, or when such a one is, by special privilege, excused from
acting, or has been removed from office by reason of suspicion, or where he has
been ascertained to be unfit to administer the property through weakness of
either mind or body. If, however, the woman should refuse the guardianship, and
prefer to marry again, then the Illustrious Prefect of the City, having
summoned the Praetor who has jurisdiction of the appointment of guardians, or
the judges who dispense justice in the provinces, shall, after investigation,
direct defenders selected from another order to be appointed for the said
minors.
Given at Milan, on the twelfth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate
of Valentinian, Consul for the fourth time, and Neo-terius, 373.
Extract from Novel,8, Chapter V. Latin Text.We permit the mother and
grandmother, in their order, to assume the guardianship even before agnates,
when either of them has declared in writing that she will not contract another
marriage, and renounces the benefit of the Velleian Decree of the Senate.
Testamentary guardians, however, will alone be preferred to the mother and
grandmother, and will take precedence of legal and other guardians
that may be appointed, as We desire the intention of the deceased to be carried
out. With the exception of these women, We forbid all others to discharge the
duties of guardians.
Extract from Novel 91, Chapter II. Latin Text.
The oath is not required at present, but it is settled that where a woman
contracts a second marriage, she can be removed from the guardianship, and that
she shall be fully liable to the minors, so far as is provided by law.
Extract from Novel 94. Latin Text.
In addition to this, if indebtedness of any description exists between the
mother and her children, she cannot be permitted to act as their guardian as
long as the obligation remains unpaid. The mother, however, can administer the
guardianship of her natural children, if she observes all the formalities which
are prescribed in the case of legitimate children.
3. The Emperor Justinian to Julian, Praetorian Prefect.
If a father did not, in accordance with Our Constitution, appoint any
testamentary guardian for his natural children, for the administration of the
property which came to them from him, and their mother should desire to assume
their guardianship, whether they are girls or boys, it shall be lawful for her
to do so, as in the case of legitimate offspring, provided she previously
swears before a competent judge that she will not contract a second marriage,
but will preserve her chastity intact, and will renounce the benefit of the
Velleian Decree of the Senate and every other legal privilege, and render her
own property liable. Under such circumstances, We consent for her to be the
guardian of her natural sons or daughters, and that all the provisions of the
Imperial Constitutions which have reference to mothers, and their children born
in lawful marriage, shall be observed by parents of this description. For if
they can be appointed guardians of legitimate children who have a right to
testamentary or legal guardians, and are themselves permitted to be the
guardians of their children where others are lacking, there is much more
reason, and it is much more humane in cases of this kind, where no legal
guardianship can exist, for their mothers to be appointed.
Given at Constantinople, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof April, during the
fifth Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes, 530.



* TITLE XXXVI.
IN CASES WHERE A MINOR ALREADY HAS A GUARDIAN OR CURATOR, ANOTHER GUARDIAN OR
CURATOR CAN BE
APPOINTED.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Tyberian and Rufus.
When the guardian in whose stead you have been temporarily appointed, having
been absent on public business, has performed the
service which was imposed upon him, and returned, you should entertain no doubt
that the affairs of the female ward come within the scope of his duty and care,
and you will act for the benefit of your own interest if you appear before the
eminent Governor of the province, and request that the guardian be compelled to
resume the administration of the trust.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Antoninus,
Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Valentinian.
A competent judge could and should have appointed a curator instead of the one
who has been excused, even though the minor may already have had other
guardians. Moreover, although he may have been substituted, together with
others, in the place of the guardian who has been excused, still, you will not
be liable for the risk of the administration after the age of puberty.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof June, during the Consulate of Modestus and
Probus, 229.
3. The Same to Hylas.
If the Governor of the province does not consider that you are sufficiently
solvent, as the property of your wards is scattered, that is to say, situated
in different places, or if you alone are not competent to undertake the
administration of the same, he must decide whether it is necessary for other
curators to be joined with you for the purpose of administering the
guardianship.
Given on the eighth of the Idesof December, during the Consulate of Pompeianus
and Pelignus, 232.
4. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to Euploius.
Although a guardian cannot be appointed for a person who already has one,
still, another who is suitable can, under certain circumstances, be substituted
by the decree of a competent court, instead of one who, having been suspected,
has been convicted and removed; and also instead of a guardian who has been
excused, or who is dead, or who has been relegated.
Given on the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Secularis, Consul for the
second time, and Donatus, 261.
5. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Zeno.
As it is usual to add new curators on account of the increase of the property
of the wards, those last appointed are not released from responsibility for the
administration of the guardianship. For certainly if he who has ceased to
administer the trust was solvent at the time of its termination, it is clear
that no liability will attach to you for any subsequent period.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of the Csesars.
'



* TITLE XXXVII.
CONCERNING THE ADMINISTRATION OF GUARDIANS AND CURATORS, AND OF MONEY BELONGING
TO THE WARDS WHICH HAS EITHER BEEN LENT AT INTEREST, OR
DEPOSITED.
Extract from Novel 72, Chapter VI. Latin Text.
It has very recently been provided that money belonging to a ward shall not be
lent at interest by his curator, and if the latter should do so, he must assume
the risk of the loan, except when the entire property subject to his
administration is movable, for then the curator is only compelled to lend a sum
sufficient for the support of the minor, and for the preservation of his
estate. Any property in excess of this must be carefully preserved, unless the
guardian is compelled by necessity to lend it, as, for instance, for the
purpose of paying the expenses , of his ward.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Modestus.
It is without good reason that you hesitate to administer the property of the
youth whose curator you are, on the ground that someone may think that you are
liable for the time preceding your appointment; but do those things which you
think should be done, and (as is the interest of all parties) see that the
judge appointed to decide between you and the guardians discharges his duty as
soon as possible.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Albinus
and ^Emilianus, 207.
2. The Same Emperors to Timon and Elpidophorus.
You cannot bring suit against the curator of a youth with whom you have been
appointed a colleague, as long as your common administration exists.
Given on the second of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Aper and
Maximus, 208.
3. The Emperor Antoninus to Eumosus.
If it is proved before the judge who has jurisdiction of matters of this kind
that the expenses incurred by you were necessary for your ward, and are due to
just and honorable causes, he will direct that an account be taken of the same,
even if a decree of the Praetor was not issued with reference to their payment;
for whatever has been expended in good faith by guardians or curators is rather
confirmed by justice than by the authority of others.
Given on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of the
two Aspers, 213.
4. The Same to Procula.
Unless it is established that the money which was due (according to his
accounts) from the paternal freedman who was the guardian
of your daughter was either deposited by him, or expended in the purchase of
land, it must be paid over to the Prefect'of the City, and the guardian shall
be punished by him in accordance with what is prescribed by law.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of the
Emperor Antoninus, Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
5. The Same to Rufinus.
It is in vain that the former guardians of the young men, whose curatorship you
are administering, refuse to comply with the judgment rendered against them, as
the money collected can be placed on deposit by order of the Governor.
Given on the Kalendsof June, during the Consulate of Laetus, Consul for the
second time, and Cerealis, 216.
6. The Emperor Alexander to Poconius.
It is not unknown that, where guardians or curators purposely institute
vexatious actions in the name of their wards or minors, they must, on that
account, be punished, lest they may think that they can fraudulently and with
impunity bring actions of their own, under the pretext of acting in behalf of
their wards, or minors.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof May, during the Consulate of Maximus, Consul
for the second time, and ^lianus, 224.
7. The Same to Valerius.
You should administer the guardianship of your wards in such a way as not to
sell the building which was left to them, as it was devised under the condition
that it should not be alienated.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof July, during the Consulate of Maximus, Consul
for the second time, and ^lianus, 224.
8. The Same to Aprilus.
If you are aware that you have been appointed curator and you do not administer
the trust, an action cannot be brought against you, if there are other curators
who have administered the curator-ship and are solvent. If, however, you did
not know that you were appointed curator, no liability will attach to you, even
if the others should be insolvent.
Given on the seventh of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Alexander, Consul for the third time, and Dio, 230.
9. The Same to Inclyta.
If you have curators, and they are unwilling to endow you with your own
property, having appeared before the Governor of the province, you can have
them compelled to provide a dowry suited to a person of honorable rank.
Given on the seventeenth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Agricola
and Clementinus, 231.
10. The Same to Rufina.
If you have suffered any injury through the negligence or fraud of the freedman
who is your curator, the Governor of the province will take measures that the
damage shall be made good by him who is responsible for it, and you should
entertain no doubt that more severe measures will be taken, if fraud has been
so openly committed that the freedman, after having been convicted of the
crime, should be punished for having perpetrated it.
Given on the eleventh of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Agricola
and Clementinus, 231.
11. The Emperor Gordian to Csecilius.
If the female ward, whose guardian you are, had a good case, and you did not
take an appeal from the judgment rendered against her; or if, after the appeal,
you did not comply with the formalities required by such a proceeding, you must
indemnify your ward in an action on guardianship.
Given on the Idesof August, during the Consulate of Gordian and Aviola, 240.
12. The Same to Octaviana.
You should take action with reference to the matters which you allege have been
fraudulently or negligently conducted by the guardian or curator of those to
whom you have succeeded, provided you have reached lawful age, for you are not
ignorant that the number of children is of very little advantage to women in
the administration of their affairs, if they are under lawful age.
Given on the third of the Nonesof October, during the Consulate of Gordian and
Pompeianus, 242.
13. The Same to Longinus.
It is clear that guardians have a right to demand anything that is due to their
wards, or placed on deposit, without being required to furnish security.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Arian and
Pappus, 244.
14. The Emperor Philip, and the Csssar Philip, to Clement.
It is certain that the accounts of the administration of a curator-ship cannot
legally be demanded during the term of office of the curator, that is to say,
before the minor has attained his twenty-fifth year.
Given on the day before the Nonesof August, during the Consulate of Philip,
Consul for the second time, and Titian, 246.
15. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Licinius.
If you have not signed as surety, you need be under no apprehension of having
suit brought against you as curator, on account of your having signed in that
capacity, as you state that you have been released from liability by a decree
of the Governor.
Given on the day before the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of Diocletian,
Consul for the third time, and Maximian, 287.
16. The Same Emperors and Czesars to Proculus.
Guardians have not the power to alienate the property of their wards without
restriction, but they should, in making a sale, do so only for the advantage of
the administration of such property as they are permitted to dispose of, and
must furnish to the purchasers a just title to possession. Therefore, as
guardians, under no circumstances, have authority to give away the property of
those whose affairs they are managing, you will not be prevented from claiming
the ownership of the property in question from those now in possession.
Given at Heraclea, on the tenth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate.of
the above-mentioned Emperors.
17. The Same Emperors and Caesars to Martialis.
Guardians need be under no apprehension with reference to their succession, as
the execution of a will is not denied to those who have administered a
guardianship, and they are not forbidden to give away any of their own
property.
Given on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors.
18. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Sotericus.
As you state that you have been appointed a guardian, notify the debtors of
your female ward to make payment as is required by your office, for liability
for the collection of the claims attaches to you. If they fail to satisfy their
debts, you can have recourse to the Common Law by selling the pledges.
Given on the day before the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors.
19. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Vindicianus.
When a guardian is appointed by a decree during his absence, and he is not
excused according to law, after having been notified, he will remain liable for
the administration of the guardianship.
Given on the third of the Idesof February, during the Consulate of the Csesars.
20. The Emperor Constantine to Euphemiana.
Minors are not prevented from claiming for themselves the property of their
guardians or curators, on account of their liability for their administration,
just as if the said property had been pledged to them.
The same rule applies where a guardian or curator is appointed, and does not
administer the property of the minors.
Given on the seventh of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Volusianus
and Annianus, 314.
21. The Same Emperors to Maximus, Praetorian Prefect.
The guardians of wards or minors are responsible for any loss of property, if
the conditions upon which donations are dependent are neglected by them.
Given at Rome, on the third of the Kalendsof February, under the Consulate of
Sabinus and Rufinus, 316.
22. The Same to the People.
The law which requires guardians and curators to sell and reduce to money all
gold, silver, jewels, clothing, and other valuable personal effects, as well as
urban estates and slaves, buildings, baths, and warehouses and other property
in the city, excepting rustic estates and slaves, is a rule which operates
greatly to the disadvantage of minors. Hence, We order that no guardian or
curator shall be permitted to sell any property of this description, unless
required to do so by necessity, or by former laws, under which he is authorized
to dispose of rustic estates and slaves, or pledge them or give them as a
donation on account of marriage, or by way of dowry; this, of course, having
been done after judicial investigation, proof of the case and rendition of a
judgment, in order that there may be no room for fraud.
Therefore urban slaves, who- alone are familiar with the entire personal
property, shall by all means always be retained as a part of the estate and
household. For good slaves prevent the commission of fraud, and bad ones, where
circumstances demand it, having been subjected to torture, can be compelled to
reveal the truth; and all things shall be done in such a manner that the
guardian cannot diminish, change, or suppress anything from the inventory. This
is necessary with reference to clothing, pearls, gems, vases, and other
personal property. In such cases it is better for slaves to die in the houses
of their masters than to serve strangers. Responsibility for their flight
should attach to the guardian, who has either caused discipline to be relaxed
by his negligence, or has punished the slaves with undue severity, or subjected
them to starvation or scourging, for they love their masters more than they
hate them. This law is better than the ancient one, for, under the terms of the
latter, the custody of slaves was relaxed, and the life of minors frequently
endangered.
It is not permitted to sell the house in which the father died or the minor was
brought up, for it would be sad enough not to see the statues of the family
ancestors fastened therein, or to have them torn away. Therefore the house and
all other immovable property shall remain as part of the patrimony of the
minors, and no building of any kind originally belonging to the estate shall be
destroyed, or allowed to fall into ruin through the fraudulent acts of the
guardian. If, however, the father or any other person of whom the minor is the
heir should leave a building in bad condition, the guardian, after having taken
the evidence of several persons with reference to it, shall be compelled to
repair it, so that the annual rent will bring more to the minors than the value
of the same will lose by neglect.
Slaves, who are familiar with any trade, must contribute their labors to the
profit of the minor, and the others who have no trade and cannot be of any use
to their master, shall be supported partly by their labor, and partly by
provisions forming part of the estate. This law has in view not only the
interests of minors, as against their guardians, but also as against prodigal
and dissolute women, who, for the most part, not only abandon the property of
their children but also the lives of the latter to their new husbands.
It happened under the old law, by whose provisions the practice of loaning at
interest money belonging to minors (on which the ancients based the entire
force of patrimony), that this practice was no sooner temporary than it became
permanent and established; and that the money loaned under such circumstances
was often lost, and the inheritance of the minors reduced to nothing. Hence a
sale of property made by a guardian without the authority of a decree shall be
null and void, with the exception solely of such clothing as, being worn out by
use, or, having been spoiled, can serve no purpose by being preserved. We do
not forbid superfluous animals to be sold, even though they may be the property
of minors.
Given on the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Constantine, Consul for the
seventh time, and Constantine-Csesar, 326.
23. The Same to Felix.
If, through the negligence or fraud of his guardian or curator, the land of a
minor should be lost because he was unwilling to pay the rent imposed upon said
land by emphyteutical contract, the said guardian or curator shall be required
to indemnify the minor out of his own property for any loss which he may have
sustained.
Given at Constantinople, on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof May, during the
Consulate of Dalmatius and Xenophilus, 333.
24. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Eutychianus, Prse-torian Prefect.
Guardians or curators, immediately after their appointment, must, in the
presence of public officials, be careful to make a formal inventory of all the
property and credits of the minors. They must also place all gold, silver, and
other personal property which is not changed by lapse of time, that is found
among the effects of the ward, in as safekeeping as possible, so that they can
purchase suitable lands with the proceeds of said property; or if none can be
found (as is usual) they can, in compliance with the terms of the ancient law,
provide for the increase of said property by means of loans at interest, the
collection of which is at the risk of the guardian.
Given at Constantinople, on the seventh of the Kalends ofMarch, during the
Consulate of Arcadius, Consul for the fourth time, and Honorius, Consul for the
third time, 396.
25. The Emperor Justinian to John, Prsetorian Prefect.We order that the debtors
of wards or minors shall be permitted to make payment to them through the
medium of their guardians and
curators, who have previously given proper security, provided that this has
been done by virtue of a judicial decision without any loss. After this has
taken place, and the judge has rendered his decision, and the debtor has
discharged the obligation, he shall then enjoy perfect security, and no one
shall subsequently be subjected to annoyance on this account; for whatever has
been done properly and in accordance with law in the beginning should not be
revived in any event whatsoever.
We do not, however, extend the operation of this law to rents, income, or
anything else of this kind to which the ward or the minor may be entitled; but
if a foreign debtor should desire to make payment and release himself from
liability arising from a loan at interest, or from any other such obligation,
he can do so, for then We order that the above formalities shall be observed.
Given at Constantinople, on the tenth of the Kalendsof March, after the fifth
Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes, 531.
26. The Same to John, Prsetorian Prefect.
A certain woman, having drawn up her will, passed over her son, and the latter
became the guardian or curator of his brother, or of a stranger who had been
appointed heir by the mother of the guardian or curator. In the present
instance, it is perfectly plain that the guardian or curator occupies a
dangerous position; for whether he refuses his authority or consent for the
ward or minor to enter upon the estate, lest by doing so his rights may be
prejudiced (for if he does, he runs the imminent risk of an action of
guardianship on the ground of voluntary agency being brought against him by
either the ward or the minor to indemnify him for loss suffered through his
delay), or whether he, being alarmed by apprehensions of this kind, gives his
consent, he still runs a risk, as by acquiescence he loses his rights, for he
appears to have confirmed the will of his mother, which he thought should be
attacked.
In addition to this, many other cases arise in which a guardian or curator may
be apprehensive of prejudicing his interests, as, for instance, where
hypothecation and various other matters are involved.
We find that it has been generally laid down that all rights of action to which
a guardian or curator is liable on account of his conduct in office should be
assigned against the former ward or minor, after the guardian or curator has
relinquished his trust. Induced by this excellent example, We desire to remove
the fear of a guardian or curator in all other cases also, in which he may
apprehend that his rights will in some manner be prejudiced; therefore We grant
him the power to administer the affairs of his wards or minors with the
greatest confidence, being aware that this Our law preserved for him his rights
unimpaired, and that he will suffer no loss through giving his authority or
consent under such circumstances.
Given at Constantinople, on the tenth of the Kalendsof September, after the
fifth Consulship of Lampadius and Orestes, 531.
27. The Same to John, Prsetorian Prefect.
We extend the scope of the Constitution that We have recently promulgated,
which has reference to payments to be made in the case of the contracts of
minors, whether they relate to rents, income, or other similar sources, as well
as to interest. It is, however, only applicable to interest recently due, and
not to that accrued for several years, the total of which does not exceed the
sum of a hundred solidi.
Given at Constantinople on the tenth of the Kalendsof November, after the fifth
Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes, 531.
28. The Same to John, Prsetorian Prefect.
We decree that no guardian or curator of a ward, a minor, a madman, or any
other person for whom curators are appointed under the ancient laws, as well as
under Our Laws and Constitutions, shall refuse to undertake the defence of such
a person which he has agreed to conduct, but that he shall defend all those
above mentioned from the beginning of the suit, in every way authorized by law,
and shall prepare their cases in a proper manner, being well aware that this is
a necessary duty of his guardianship or curatorship. If, however, he should
refuse to do so, or delay to act, he can not only be removed on the ground of
suspicion, and be considered infamous, but he shall also be compelled to make
good out of his own property all losses which the persons aforesaid may sustain
through his refusal to undertake their defence.
(1) Where, however, anyone, after having been notified that proceedings have
been instituted against him, furnishes the ordinary security required in
proceedings of this kind, either after issue has been joined in which he has
appeared by himself and not by an attorney, or if he should become demented or
insane, We order that he shall at once have a curator appointed for him by a
competent court, through the care and foresight of the judge before whom the
action is pending, as well as through that of the cognates and other relatives
of the party in question, and even through the agency of the plaintiff, if he
should desire this to be done, so that the suit brought by him may not be too
greatly prolonged, and the curator who has been appointed may be required to
conduct the defence, and attend to the other matters growing out of the action.
(2) Those also (whether they be mothers or any other persons) who, at their own
risk, have asked that guardians and curators of their own property be
appointed, should compel the individuals whom they have designated as guardians
or curators to prepare to undertake the defence of the parties whom they
represent. If they should be unwilling to do this, and, on account of their
refusal, should be removed from the guardianship or curatorship, We require the
persons aforesaid to designate other guardians or curators for the
administration of those matters for which guardians or curators are appointed,
who will declare openly that they will conduct the defence. Lest such persons
may be abandoned without proper protection, or the rights of the parties
interested may remain too long without being
decided, We decree that immediately, that is to say, after the refusal of those
who were designated to undertake the defence, in cases (as has already been
stated) when this can be done, the appointment of other guardians and curators
shall be made, the cognates, other relatives, connections by marriage,
creditors, and all other persons who are interested being present, and advising
those who, according to the laws, have a right to appoint guardians or
curators.
(3) In this instance, wishing to state and define more clearly what kind of a
defence should be conducted, lest guardians or curators may think that too
heavy a burden is imposed upon them, We decree that they shall make such a
defence as does not require security to be furnished with a view to the
termination of the action; but only that they will proceed in behalf of the
ward or minor or any other person whom they represent, in conformity with the
provisions of the laws, and by the authority of this enactment, they are
granted permission to give the property subject to their administration as
security for the lawsuit, without any decree.
(4) Desiring to remove all doubt with reference to the defence of wards,
minors, and other persons, We order that guardians and curators shall not be
appointed, unless they first solemnly declare that every step for the
administration of the property of those entrusted to their care will be taken
by them, not only in the conduct of their affairs, but also in whatever relates
to furnishing security for the same. They must also state in plain terms that
they will conduct the defence of their wards and minors, and the other persons
previously mentioned, without any delay whatever, as they are required to do.
(5) In order to leave no doubt on this point, We add to these provisions that
all guardians and curators shall be permitted to sell at a just price, and
without any decree of court, all crops of every description, that is to say,
wine, oil, and grain, whether these are obtained from the rents of land, or
have been derived from property of the persons under their control, at the
price at which they are worth at the time and place of the sale, and any money
which may be collected from the sale of said crops shall be administered along
with the other property of the said wards, minors, or other persons.
Given at Constantinople, on the twelfth of the Kalendsof November, after the
fifth Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes, 531.



* TITLE XXXVIII.
CONCERNING THE LIABILITIES OF GUARDIANS AND CURATORS.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Quantus.
Freedmen who are appointed guardians on account of their knowledge of the
circumstances of their wards, although they alone may not be invested with the
power of administering the property of the said wards or minors on account of
their poverty, are, nevertheless,
all liable, whether they conceal from their fellow-guardians or curators those
things which they ought to know, as being connected with the welfare of their
wards, or whether they are guilty of fraud, either alone or in complicity with
others, or whether they should be regarded as suspicious, or whether they fail
to discharge the duties of their office, or do not manifest the respect which
they should do.
Given on the ninth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of
Alexander, Consul for the second time, and Marcellus, 227.
2. The Same to Saturus.
Personal liability for the administration of guardians who transact the affairs
of wards in one province does not extend to those who administer the
guardianship in another.
Given on the Nonesof July, during the Consulate of Alexander, Consul for the
second time, and Marcellus, 227.
3. The Emperor Philip and the Csesar Philip to Graticm..
If the property belonging to your ward, which was deposited in a warehouse and
which you should have sold, has been consumed by fire in your lodging, as you
allege, you assert without good reason that you should not bear the loss
resulting from your negligence or inactivity, but that it should be sustained
by your ward.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Philip and
Titian, 246.
4. The Same Emperor and Caesar to Florus.
It has frequently been stated in rescripts that guardians and curators are not
responsible for accidental occurrences which could not be provided against.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of Philip
and Titian, 246.
5. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Severus.
If you have been appointed guardian on petition, or by will, and have not
learned of your appointment, not because of negligence, but through excusable
ignorance, and you establish this fact by clear proofs, you will not be liable
for the administration of the guardianship during the time you were ignorant
that it had been conferred upon you.
Given on the third of the Idesof September, during the Consulate of Diocletian,
Consul for the fourth time, and Maximian, Consul for the third time, 290.
6. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Epictetus.
It is reasonable that a guardian should not be responsible for the
administration of the guardianship, for any time following the termination of
the same.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of the
Csesars.




* TITLE XXXXXXIIXX..
WHEN MINORS CAN SUE OB BE SUED ON ACCOUNT OP THE ACTS OF THEIR GUARDIANS OR
CURATORS.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Septimius.
If Juliana, against whose curators a decision has been rendered in your favor,
has passed her twenty-fifth year, a praetorian action to enforce judgment can
be brought by you against her, and her property, for it has frequently been
decided that guardians and curators cannot be sued on account of their
administration of the affairs of wards or minors after the termination of their
office.
Given at Rome on the eighth of the Kalendsof July, under the Consulate of
Antoninus, Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Sorarchus.
Although your guardians, when they lent your money, made stipulations in their
own names, you will be entitled to an equitable action.
3. The Emperor Gordian to Prudentianus.
If the money lent in the name of the minor to the guardian or curator has been
employed for the benefit of the property of the former, it is only reasonable
that a personal action should be granted against the said minor.
Given on the Nonesof September, during the Consulate of Gordian and Aviola,
240.
4. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Maximiana.
If those who have been appointed your guardians or curators while you were
under age should afterwards continue to administer your affairs, and lease your
lands, sue them in accordance with the forms of the law. An equitable action
based on their contracts can be demanded by you against the heirs of the
lessee.
Given on the third of the Nonesof March, under the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.
5. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Onesima.
A right of action cannot be transferred by a guardian to his ward unless for
certain reasons.
Given on the Idesof December, during the Consulate of the Csesars.



* TITLE XL.
WHERE THERE ARE SEVERAL GUARDIANS OR CURATORS,
ALL OR ONE OF THEM CAN SUE OR BE SUED IN THE
NAME OF THE MINOR.
1. The Emperor Antonins to the Soldier Cassius.
You should not be ignorant that a case can be defended by one of the guardians
or curators of a minor, when the others refuse to undertake the defence.
Given on the Nonesof November, during the Consulate of Mes-sala and Sabinus,
215.
2. The Emperor Constantine, and the Csesar Licinius, to Sym-machus.
If liability for the administration has been divided among guardians by
provinces, it issettled that those only can sue and be sued who are discharging
the duties of the guardianship and curatorship in each province, to prevent the
guardians of minors in one province from being brought into court in another.
Given on the day before the Nonesof February, during the Consulship of
Constantine and Licinius, 319.



* TITLE XLI.
NEITHER A GUARDIAN NOR A CURATOR SHALL ACT AS A COLLECTOR OF TAXES.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Sextus.
A competent judge is well aware that those who are conducting the affairs
either of the guardianship or curatorship of wards or minors, and have not yet
rendered the account of their administration, should not be permitted to act as
collectors of taxes. But although you accepted an office of this kind contrary
to law, as you have voluntarily appeared before me, you will not be guilty of
the crime of deceit, if you satisfy the Treasury as well as your wards. If,
however, being already liable to the Treasury on this account, you state that
you have subsequently been appointed a guardian, you can be released from
liability for the guardianship.
Given at Rome on the eighth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of
Antoninus, Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.



* TITLE XLII.
CONCERNING THE GUARDIAN OR CURATOR WHO DOES NOT FURNISH SECURITY.

1. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to Titus and Flavianus.
If you have not yet reached lawful age, demand security from those who you
state have been appointed your curators by your adversary while he was
performing the functions of a magistrate, and who are not solvent, for they
should be prevented from administering your affairs, unless they provide for
your security by means of a bond.
Given on the Nonesof July, during the Consulate of ^milianus and Bassus, 260.

2. The Same Emperors, and the Ctesar Valerian, to Euploius.
Application having been made to the Governor of the province, he will order
that if the remaining guardian does not furnish secu-
rity in accordance with his order and the requirements of the law, he shall be
removed from office if, without being branded with infamy, he did this on
account of poverty; but if he has acted fraudulently he will be considered
infamous, and the Governor shall order other suitable guardians to be
substituted in the place of those who are deceased, especially as you allege
that the patrimony of the ward has been increased by the addition of another
estate. The guardians who have been appointed must demand an account of the
guardianship from the heirs of those who you say have died.
Given on the Idesof May, during the Consulate of Secullaris and Donatus, 261.

3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Stratonicus.
There is no doubt that guardians who have not been appointed by will have no
authority to administer property unless the guardianship is protected by
security previously furnished. Therefore, where a guardian who has not given
security for his administration is sued, the judgment rendered against him
cannot affect your rights, nor can the business which he has transacted be
considered as possessing any validity. Hence you will in vain apply for the
relief of complete restitution, when whatever has been done by him is void in
law.
Given at Nicomedia, on the eighteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of Diocletian, Consul for the third time, and Maximian, 287.

4. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Tertullus.
The condition of all guardians is not the same. For example, where a
testamentary guardian has been confirmed by a Governor, or one is appointed
after investigation, it is clear that he is not required to give security for
the preservation of the property of his ward; still, it has long been the
practice that where several guardians have been appointed after investigation,
and one of them has, in accordance with the terms of the Edict, furnished
security for the preservation of the property of his ward, he shall be
preferred to the others in the administration of the guardianship.
Given at Nicomedia, on the Idesof December, during the Consulate of the
Caesars.

5. The Emperors Constantine and Maximian to the Csesars Sev-erus and Maximus.
A guardian who is obliged to furnish security, but has not done so, cannot in
any manner alienate any of the property of his ward. But it is perfectly
evident that, after he has been chosen for the administration of the
guardianship, he can demand possession of the property in the name of his ward,
and that he should perform any other acts which are necessary to be done at the
time.
Given on the eleventh of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of
Constantius and Maximian, 305.



* TITLE XLIII. CONCERNING SUSPECTED GUARDIANS AND CURATORS.

1. The Emperor Antoninus to Domitia.
You can cause your freedman, who is the guardian of your son, to be declared
liable to suspicion, if you think that he has fraudulently administered the
property of his ward, provided his office has not been terminated by the
arrival of the ward at the age of puberty; for if he has ceased to be a
guardian by law, an action of guardianship should be brought against him.
Given at Rome on the Idesof August, during the Consulate of the two Aspers,
213.

2. The Same to Longinus.
Where, through the fault of curators, the transfer of their trust to them is
delayed, they become liable. If, however, you think that this delay has been
caused by fraud, demand that they be declared suspicious, and you can have
others appointed in their stead.
Given on the Idesof January, during the Consulate of Lsetus, Consul for the
second time, and Cerealis, 216.

3. The Emperor Alexander to Fortunata.
The Governor of the province will, by the employment of more severe measures,
compel the guardians of your children to discharge the duties of their
administration. If, however, they persist in the same obstinacy, you will not
be prevented from asking that they be declared suspicious, in order that others
may be appointed in their stead.
Given on the Idesof January, during the Consulate of Alexander, Consul for the
third time, and Dio, 230.

4. The Same Emperor to Thalida.
You can demand that the guardian who has been appointed by the will of your
father be declared suspicious, if you think that he has committed fraud while
acting in that capacity.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Paternus, 234.

5. The Same to Asclepias.
In applying for the removal of guardians or curators on the ground of
suspicion, it is necessary in the first place to carefully consider not only
the amount of their property, but whether anything has been done by them either
negligently or fraudulently.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Paternus, 234.

6. The Emperor Gordian to Felix.
You are performing the duty required by affection when you attempt to protect
the children of your brother, as blood relationship
demands. Therefore, if their guardians or curators should not properly
administer their affairs, and, having demanded that they be declared
suspicious, you proved that this is the case, you can easily have others
appointed in their stead. If, however, they have committed no fraudulent act,
but are so poor that the property of the children of your brother will be
endangered by their administration of the same, the Governor of the province
must decide whether a curator, who is solvent, should be added to them. The
right to demand their removal is not restricted to their ascendants of either
sex, but is also enjoyed by their cognates, as well as strangers and
connections by marriage, and even by him who has the administration of the
property, if he is not under the age of puberty; which step must be approved by
his cognates of good reputation.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof November, during the Consulate of Pius and
Pontianus, 239.

7. The Same to Gorgonia.
The Governor of the province shall order him whom you accuse of being a
suspicious guardian or curator to abstain from the administration of all your
property during the hearing of the case, and until it has been terminated. In
the meantime, another may be appointed in his stead for the management of the
property.
Given on the seventh of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Sabinus,
Consul for the second time, and Venustus, 341.

8. The Emperor Philip and the C&sar Philip to Proculus.
If you have not made application for your fellow-guardian to be declared
suspicious, and be removed from the administration of the property of your
ward, the demand that you now make for him to transfer the guardianship to you
in the name of said ward, can, by no means, be admitted.
Given on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of
Peregrinus and ^milianus, 245.

9. The Emperors Diocletian and Maxvmian to Hammianus.
It is clear that guardians who have been declared suspicious on account of
fraud committed by them, and not those who have been removed on account of
negligence, become infamous.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of the Caesars.



* TITLE XLIV.
CONCERNING A GUARDIAN OR CURATOR APPOINTED TO CONDUCT LITIGATION.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Miltiades.
If you have any action to bring against your wards, you can bring it, provided
your fellow-guardians appear and defend the case; and
if you have no fellow-guardians, curators should be appointed for the purpose
of defence in litigation of this kind.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of
Antoninus, Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Evarestus.
The judge having jurisdiction of such matters shall decide whether you are
entitled to an action for the recovery of the land belonging to your father's
estate. You should, however, take into consideration your duty as guardian
(which office you say you hold), in order that, if eviction should take place
in consequence of the proceedings, you will not subject your ward, as the heir,
to the payment of a larger price than was given by the other party, if you
undertake the defence, and you can either set it off against your accounts, or
you can bring a counter action of guardianship.
Your rights, if you have any, will not be prejudiced under these circumstances;
and curators can be appointed for the ward for the purpose of defending the
case, which should be brought against you as claimant of the property.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Julian,
Consul for the second time, and Crispinus, 225.
3. The Emperor Galliemis to Valerius.
A guardian or curator appointed for the purpose of defending the case of a ward
cannot be sued for the acts of his administration, as the guardianship has only
been undertaken for a special purpose. Therefore if (as you allege) you have
transacted no business with the exception of that for which you were appointed,
suit will in vain be brought against you.
Given on the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Valerian and Lucian, 266.
4. The Same Emperor to Irenseus.
If, acting as a guardian appointed to conduct a lawsuit, you have expended
anything in good faith, you can collect it in the customary manner from your
fellow-guardians.
Given on the Kalendsof November during the Consulate of Pa-ternus and
Arcesilaus, 263.
5. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Tigranus.
When, either under the terms of a will, or through legal relationship, the
responsibility of the guardianship of the children of your brother has been
imposed upon you, you should be under no apprehensions with reference to any
disputes which you state formerly existed between you and your deceased
brother; for if suit should be brought, an attorney having been appointed, and
a curator designated to conduct the case of the wards, which should be done
with the formalities required by law, the interests of all parties will be
protected.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of the Caesars.



* TITLE XLV.
CONCERNING ONE WHO TRANSACTS BUSINESS IN THE PLACE OF A GUARDIAN.
1. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to Marcellus.
Women, also, who administer the affairs of wards in the capacity of guardians,
are required to render accounts.
Given during the Consulate of ^Emilianus and Bassus, 260.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Cazsars, tc Marcus.
A person who has not been legally appointed guardian, but who acts in the name
of minors, can be removed by an exception (if he is not a guardian), although
he may discharge the duties enjoined upon persons of this kind.
Given on the Nonesof December, during the Consulate of the Caesars.



* TITLE XLVI. WHERE A MOTHER PROMISES INDEMNITY.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Brutia.
The guardians who have been appointed by the magistrates upon your application,
are at their risk, rather than that you, contrary to the condition of your sex,
should be liable to anyone for the reason that you have demanded guardians to
be appointed for your children on your own responsibility.
Given on the third of the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Maximus, Consul
for the third time, and Urbanus, 225.
2. The Emperor Philip and the Csesar Philip to Asclepias and Menander.
You allege that indemnity has been promised to you in the name of your wards by
their mother and paternal uncle, who have desired to transact certain business,
and, under such circumstances, if the said wards have reached lawful age, they
can proceed against you legally, and not against their mother or their uncle;
hence, it is not without reason that you ask to be indemnified against what you
state was undertaken at their risk, during their administration of said
business.
Given on the fourth of the Idesof July, during the Consulate of Praesens and
Albinus, 247.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Caianus.
You improperly contend that the mother is liable to you for the administration
of an incapable guardian appointed at her instance, as this cannot take place
unless it was specifically stated in the decree authorizing his appointment
that she would be liable.
Given on the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the same Emperors.



* TITLE XLVII.
WHERE A GUARDIAN Is APPOINTED AGAINST THE WISHES OF THE MOTHER.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Tertius.
If you prove that Fuscinius was appointed guardian of your son in opposition to
the last will of his deceased mother, the Praetor will decree that he shall be
removed from the guardianship, without being considered infamous. This
provision, however, will not apply if the guardian should be convicted of
having been guilty of fraud.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of
Lateranus and Rufinus, 198.



* TITLE XLVIII.
A GUARDIAN SHOULD ASSIST IN THE TRIAL OF A CASE OF His WARD AFTER THE LATTER
REACHES PUBERTY.
1. The Emperor Philip to Dexter.
It has been frequently stated in rescripts that guardians who have not yet
transferred their administration to curators must assist in the defence of the
cases of their wards. Therefore if, as you allege, the parties whom you mention
have in their possession any documents which can be of assistance in the appeal
of the case, the Governor of the province, after application has been made to
him, shall order them to produce said documents, or be liable for not doing so.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of Philip
and Titian, 246.



* TITLE XLIX. WHERE MINORS SHOULD BE BROUGHT UP.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Dionysodorus.
The bringing up of your wards should be entrusted to their mother in preference
to all other persons, if she has not given them a stepfather. Where, however, a
dispute with reference to this point arises between her and the cognates and
guardians, the Governor of the province, after having taken into consideration
the rank and relationship of the parties, should decide where the child is to
be brought up; and when he renders such a decision, he whom he charges with
this duty will be obliged to perform it.
Given on the seventh of the Idesof February, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Julianus, 224.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Grata.
The Governor of the province will decide whether your grandson by your daughter
shall reside with you, or with his paternal uncle,
after having- taken into account the affection which each of you entertains for
him, and which one he is most likely to succeed as heir.



* TITLE L. CONCERNING THE SUPPORT TO BE FURNISHED TO A WARD.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to FoMstinus.
When a ward is not furnished support by his guardian, he should apply to the
Governor of the province who will perform his duty in seeing that no delay
takes place in providing him with food.
The same rule applies if a suit is pending with reference to the status of the
ward or minor, or concerning his property.
Given at Rome, on the sixth of the Idesof July, during the Consulate of La3tus,
Consul for the second time, and Cerealis, 216.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Euphidus.
Although for the most part it is required that the support given to wards or
minors by a decision of the Prsetor should be regulated in proportion to their
means, still, sometimes those who transact the business of others make
provisions for them at their own instance, to avoid having any controversy in
court. Hence, where a guardian, being a good and innocent man, provides for his
ward in accordance with his own judgment, which it is sometimes necessary for
him to do in order to avoid revealing the secrets of the estate, and exposing
debts which may be doubtful, since, in the meantime, it is better to keep
silent than to have any inquiry made concerning the amount of their property,
by voluntarily applying to the judge to establish their allowance and giving
him information against the interests of the wards, there is no doubt that they
should be reimbursed for any expenses which they may have incurred for the
support, the bringing up, and the education of the wards, in accordance with
the opinion of a good citizen. For it should not be tolerated that a young man
who has received instruction and has been supported should refuse to pay such
expenses, if he cannot prove that they have been incurred by someone else, just
as if he had lived on wind, and was not imbued with the principles of a
freeman.
Given on the Nones ofDecember, during the Consulate of Maximus, Consul for the
second time, and ^Elianus, 224.



* TITLE LI.
THE DECISION OP GUARDIANSHIP. 1. The Emperor Antoninus to Leo.
As an account of the administration of your guardianship has been demanded by
you, it is not in conformity with the trust or with legal evidence (as you
allege), for you to be compelled to show that
the testator either increased or diminished the estate of the wards by the
terms of his will.
2. The Same to Prsesentinus.
The judge who has jurisdiction over the case shall examine whether the debts
due to the estate were good at the beginning of the guardianship, and whether
they have subsequently become uncollectible through the gross negligence of the
guardian; and if it is clear that they have been depreciated through the fraud
or evident negligence of the guardian, he must provide for indemnification of
the ward by an action of guardianship growing out of the negligence of the
guardian.
Given on the Nonesof July, during the Consulate of Antoninus, Consul for the
fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
3. The Same to Vitalius.
If your curator, after a decree of the Governor, appropriates a sum of money
which had been deposited for the purchase of a certain tract of land, and
purchases it for himself, you can take your choice whether you will claim the
property as having been bought with your money, or whether you will demand it
with interest as having been converted by him to his own use. The judge before
whom the action is brought shall render his decision in accordance with the
circumstances.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Lastus,
Consul for the second time, and Cerealis, 216.
4. The Emperor Alexander to Aglaiis.
There is no reason why he who rejects the estate of his father in conformity
with the terms of the Edict should have an action of inheritance brought
against him. Nor does it make any difference if an action will lie in his favor
against his curators or guardians, where he did not designedly reject the
estate. In a proceeding of this kind, which has reference to what the guardians
did, or should have done, their negligence alone is considered; and no account
is taken of the damages sustained by the ward through not accepting the estate.
The result of this is that, if you have compromised with your guardians or
curators, no action will lie in favor of the creditors of your father as
against you.
Given on the third of the Kalends ofMay, during the Consulate of Alexander,
223.
5. The Emperor Gordian to Victorinus.
It has been established for a long time that all guardians or their heirs
should appear before the same judge. Therefore, as you allege that your father
administered the guardianship with another person, the Governor of the province
should appoint the same judge for the purpose of determining how much you, as
well as the heirs of the fellow-guardians of your father, should each be
required to pay.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Pius and
Pontianus, 239.
6. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Conon and Others.
As it is alleged that your guardian is not only guilty of having made a
forbidden sale, but also of fraud with reference to the price, the Governor of
the province should not hesitate to order the remainder of the price, together
with interest for" which your property was sold, immediately to be returned to
you, if you desire to have the sale confirmed. It is superfluous for you to
petition Us to have the heirs of him who sold the property pay you the price of
the same, which you have demanded from them, for the reason that this cannot be
concealed from the knowledge of the Governor.
The guardians who are concerned in the transaction, or their heirs, should be
sued in the first place, on account of the affairs which have been administered
by them, and the other guardians can only be held liable for damages for
business which they have transacted as substitutes. If, however, it is shown
that all of them administered the guardianship together, you will have the
right to select which one you will sue, so that the rights of action which you
have against the others may be assigned to the one whom you have chosen.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of the
Emperor Diocletian, Consul for the fourth time, and the Emperor Maximian,
Consul for the third time, 290.
7. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Alexander.
It is a certain rule of law that anything that minors have lost through the
fraud, or gross or slight negligence of a guardian or curator, they can recover
by the action of guardianship, or by the praetorian action of voluntary agency,
even if the said guardian or curator did not acquire the property when he could
have done so.
Given on the day before the Idesof April, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.
8. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Dalmatius.
The prescription of long time does not prevent guardians from being sued in the
action of guardianship. Therefore, if you have not released your guardians by a
compromise, a novation, or a receipt, you will not be prevented from demanding
whatever is due to you before the Governor of the province.
Given on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof May, under the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.
9. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Julian.
You can sue your former guardian before the Prsetor to compel him to render an
account, or to restore what you are entitled to and which remains in his hands.
For although it is alleged that your mother, having received the administration
of your property from the
hands of your guardian, promised to indemnify him for any loss you might
sustain in consequence, still, a right of action based on the stipulation will
lie in your favor against your mother's heirs.
Given on the day before the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors.
10. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Pomponius.
If the deceased administered your guardianship, you cannot claim or hold the
ownership of his property, but an action of guardianship will lie in your favor
against his heirs. It is, however, necessary for the debt to be proved by other
evidence; for as neither he nor his wife had possession of the property
previous to the administration of the guardianship, the evidence which you
offer is not sufficient; for neither industry, nor the increase of their
property which is obtained by their labor or in many other ways should be
forbidden to the poor.
Ordered on the tenth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of the
Caasars, 293.
11. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Chrusianus.
Where a guardian continues in the administration of the guardianship after a
girl has arrived at the age of puberty, he can be compelled by an action of
guardianship to render an account for the entire time. If, however, he does not
interfere in the management of the affairs of the ward after his administration
has been terminated, he will not be responsible for the time which has
subsequently
elapsed.
Given on the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 293.
12. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Quintilla.
An action of guardianship will lie in favor of the heirs of a ward against
those of the guardian.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the
Csesars, 293.
13. The Emperor Justinian to Julian, Prsetorian Prefect.
In order to dispose of the doubt attaching to the ancient law, We order that if
a guardian or curator has stated that the property of a ward or minor is
greater in amount than it really is, whether he did so for the welfare of the
ward, or minor, or through his own mistake, or for any other reason whatsoever,
it shall, in no way, prejudice the truth, but this shall prevail; and the
estimate of the property of the ward or minor shall not be calculated on any
other basis than that which the nature of the property requires. Where,
however, the said guardian or curator publicly stated the amount of the
property of the ward or minor in an inventory, and by means of a document of
this kind made it greater than it really was, the value of said property shall
not be estimated in any other way than by
means of the said inventory, and the guardian or curator shall be compelled to
render an account of the estate in accordance with the terms of that document.
For no man can be found who is so stupid (even if he is a fool) as to suffer
anything against himself to be inserted in a public inventory.
(1) The rule should be strictly observed that a guardian or curator shall not
venture to have anything to do with the property of his ward or minor, or claim
for himself any right to administer it before an inventory has been publicly
drawn up, and the said property transferred to him in the usual manner, unless
the testator from whom it was derived especially forbade an inventory of the
same to be made. All guardians and curators are notified that, if they have
failed to make an inventory, and are removed from office as being suspected,
and are subjected to the penalties provided by the laws, and are afterwards
branded with perpetual infamy, they cannot enjoy the benefit of the Imperial
absolution from this dishonor.
Given at Constantinople, on the Idesof August, during the Consulate of
Lampadius and Orestes, 530.



* TITLE LII.
CONCERNING THE DIVISION OP GUARDIANSHIP, AND FOR WHAT PORTION OP THE SAME EACH
GUARDIAN Is LIABLE.
1. The Emperor Gordian to Optatus.
If, when the administration of the guardianship was terminated, your colleagues
were solvent to the extent to which they were liable, and afterwards not having
been called to account, they became insolvent, the rule of law does not permit
that the fault of others should be atoned for at your expense.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Gordian, Consul
for the second time, and Pompeianus, 242.
2. The Emperors Carinus and Numerianus to Primigenius.
If the division of the administration has not yet been made between guardians
or curators in the same place or province in which they were appointed, the
minor has a right to select one of them and collect the entire indebtedness
from him, and, by doing so, he will release any other rights of action against
the other guardians or curators to which he may be entitled. But where the
division of the administration has been made either by the Governor, or by the
will of the testator, the minor can sue either one of the said guardians or
curators on account of his share of the administration.
In a case of this kind, the guardians or curators are only responsible for the
share of the administration with which they have been entrusted, unless they
have failed to remove one of their number on account of his being suspected of
being guilty of fraud or negligence; or they stated their suspicions of this,
when it was too late, and the said guardian or curator had become insolvent; or
whether,
in proceeding against the suspected person, they have voluntarily betrayed the
interests of the ward; it will be of no advantage to them to allege that their
fellow-guardian did not administer the affairs of
the trust.
Where, however, they themselves divided the administration between them, the
minor will not be prevented from suing any one of them for the entire amount,
provided he transfers to the one whom he selects all the rights of action which
he has against the others.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Carinus,
Consul for the second time, and Numerianus, 284.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximlan, and the Csesars, to Zoticus.
Although guardians cannot, by means of a mutual agreement, release one another
from liability, still, there is no doubt that the one who administered the
trust, as well as his heirs, can be sued in the first place, if he is solvent.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of the
Caesars.



* TITLE LIII.
CONCERNING THE OATH TO BE TAKEN DURING LITIGATION.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Asclepius.
When receiving a judge for the transfer of the guardianship as against the
heirs, you desire that all the documents having reference to the ward shall be
returned to you at the time of the commencement of the suit. If, through fraud,
they are not produced, you will have a right to be sworn, provided you wish to
extend the affection due to your former ward by invoking the sanction of
religion.
Given on the Kalendsof August, during the second Consulate of Antoninus and
Geta, 206.
2. The Emperor Antoninus to Sevenis.
He who demands an account of the administration of a guardianship or a
curatorship cannot be compelled against his will to take the oath in court, but
if he wishes to do so, he should be heard, if the heir of the guardian either
through fraud, or for the purpose of deceiving the ward, refuses to produce the
documents in which the latter is interested. When, however, he is not convicted
of fraud, gross negligence, or an intention to deceive the heir, as the oath
under such circumstances does not apply, the judge shall ascertain the truth
which he can do by means of convincing evidence.
Given on the eleventh of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of the two
Aspers, 213.
3. The Same to Priscianus.
The sum mentioned in the decree which the judge, after having caused you to be
sworn, has rendered against your former curators, cannot be diminished by an
agreement.
Given on the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Lsetus, Consul for the
second time, and Cerealis, 216.
4. The Emperor Gordian to Mutian.
Aguardian is subject to one law and his heir to another, for if the guardian
should not produce the inventory and other documents demanded, the oath in
court can be admitted against him; and the same rule applies to his heir, if he
has found the documents among the papers of the estate, and fraudulently
refuses to produce them. But as you allege that as proceedings were instituted
against the guardian himself, they must be transferred by you against his
heirs; and, unless the documents in question are produced, the Governor of the
province must perform his duty, being well aware what it is as prescribed by
the terms of the constitutions.
Given on the seventh of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Pius and
Pontianus, 239.
5. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Artemidorus.
Although it has been decided that, in an action of guardianship, the oath
should not be taken against the heirs for the reason that they have not made
the inventory, still, it is proper for the judge to render a decision against
them after having ascertained by other evidence that fraud has been committed
by the guardian.
Given at Nicomedia, on the eighth of the Kalendsof January, under the Consulate
of the Csesars, 294.



* TITLE LIV. CONCERNING THE HEIRS OF GUARDIANS OR CURATORS.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Fuscianus.
The heirs of a guardian should not be held liable for his neglect, which is not
comparable to gross negligence, if proceedings were not instituted against him,
as they have neither profited by the loss of the ward, nor have done nothing by
way of favor.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Lateranus and
Rufinus, 198.
2. The Emperor Antoninus to Valentine and Maternus.
Your father, having been appointed a guardian or curator, and not having been
excused, you can, none the less, as his heirs, be sued in an equitable action
or one on guardianship, although you allege that he did not administer the
guardianship or curatorship; for lia-
bility exists on account of his failure to administer the same. It has,
however, frequently been stated in rescripts that proceedings should first be
instituted for their acts against those who administered the trust.
Given on the eleventh of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of
Antoninus, Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
3. The Same to Vita.
Proceed against the heirs of your former guardian by an action of guardianship,
and whatever he was liable to you for on account of being a surety, will also
be included in the action.
Given on the third of the Nonesof July, during the Consulate of Antoninus,
Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
4. The Emperor Alexander to Frontimis.
The heirs of those who have administered a guardianship or curatorship are
required to restore whatever may have come into their hands which forms part of
the property of the ward or the minor. There is also no doubt that an account
should be rendered of whatever the guardian or curator should have
administered, but did not.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of
Alexander, Consul for the third time, and Dio, 230.



* TITLE LV. WHEN A GUARDIAN OR A CURATOR DOES NOT ACT.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Zodicus.
It is certain that not only those who administered the affairs of a
guardianship, but also those who ought to have done so, and did not, will be
liable in an action of guardianship for what could not be recovered from their
fellow-guardians, for the reason that they failed to have them declared
suspicious when they should have done so.
Moreover, although you could not bring an action involving infamy against your
patron, you still were able to provide that you should lose nothing by the
administration of the guardianship, by making the necessary application to the
court having jurisdiction of such matters.
Given on the second of the Idesof December, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and ^Elianus, 224.
2. The Same to Justus.
Where persons do not interfere in the affairs of a guardianship or curatorship,
they are not liable when those guardians or curators who have administered the
guardianship are solvent. If, however, they have failed to perform certain acts
which they should have performed, all will be equally liable for gross
negligence.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Julian,
Consul for the second time, and Crispinus, 225.



* TITLE LVI. CONCERNING INTEREST BELONGING TO WARDS.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Crescentina.
It was long ago settled that a gu'ardian or curator who has employed the money
of his ward for his own benefit will be liable for legal interest on the same.
Given on the Nonesof June, during the Consulate of Antoninus, Consul for the
fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Ampliatus.
There is no doubt that interest should be paid on what is due on account of the
guardianship, although payment is required for what is due from a fellow-
guardian who is insolvent, as this would not have happened if the removal of
the guardian had been accomplished by means of a statement that he was liable
to suspicion.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Julian,
Consul for the second time, and Crispinus, 225.
3. The Same to Vitalius.
If you have not been able to lend the money belonging to your ward to persons
who are solvent, or employ it in the purchase of land, the judge will know that
interest on said money cannot be collected from you.
Given on the Idesof April, during the Consulate of Modestus and Probus, 229.
4. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Ditatius and
Aurelius.
Your ward cannot be compelled to bring an action of guardianship against you,
but if you owe him anything, try to bring him into court by frequently serving
notice upon him, so that interest may not run on what you owe; and if, through
dissimulation, he protracts the affair, file your statement in writing before
the Governor of the province. In this way, you will provide for your own
security, as well as that for your children. This also applies to curators.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of the
Csesars, 293.



* TITLE LVII.
CONCERNING THE SURETIES OR GUARDIANS AND CURATORS.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Felix.
You must choose whether you will proceed against the guardians or curators
themselves, their heirs, or those who became their sureties ; or you can divide
your action if you prefer to do so; for suit
cannot be brought against a defendant and his sureties for the entire amount,
at the same time.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of Julian,
Consul for the second time, and Crispinus, 225.
2. The Same to Priscus.
It is a certain rule of law that if the principal is chosen to be sued, and is
solvent, the surety will be released, and therefore if the surety is merely
accepted for the amount for which the guardian or curator will be liable (as
you state that the guardian or curator having had judgment rendered against him
has made payment), how can any doubt arise as to the release of the surety? If,
however, any stipulation has been entered into with reference to the integrity
of the property of the ward, or security has been given for anything which
cannot be made good by the guardian or curator, the surety will remain bound to
make up the deficiency.
Given on the seventh of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Fuscus,
Consul for the second time, and Dexter, 226.



* TITLE LVIII. CONCERNING THE COUNTER ACTION OP GUARDIANSHIP.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Strata.
If you have paid a sum of money for your fellow-guardian, after judgment has
been rendered against you, no action will lie in your favor against the ward to
compel him to assign his right of action to you against him who has been
released by your having made payment. Where, however, you have purchased the
claim, having been appointed attorney in your own behalf, you can bring an
action to enforce judgment against the heirs of the person for whom you made
payment.
Given on the second of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Fabian and
Mutianus, 202.
2. The Emperor Antoninus to Primitivus.
If you, through no fault of your own, have had judgment rendered against you in
favor of your female ward, and while absent and undefended you acquiesced in
the decision, as you have taken measures to satisfy the judgment, you can have
her rights of action against your fellow-guardian assigned to you by your ward,
or you can avail yourself of the praetorian action.
Given on the second of the Idesof October, during the Consulate of the two
Aspers, 213.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Thesis.
If your father, whom you allege administered the estate of his step-son, died
after having executed a will according to law, and by it appointed his former
ward his heir, as it is established that a claim
for the hereditary share of the guardianship has not been extinguished by
merger, it will be proper for you as the co-heir of your father to render an
account for the remaining portion of the guardianship before a competent judge.
In accordance with the requirements of good faith, set-off will be admitted for
the amount which you allege your father expended for the benefit of his ward,
and if, after this, any more is due, you will be obliged to pay it. Where,
however, being aware that more has been expended for his benefit than you are
liable for, he does not think that an action of guardianship should be brought
on this ground, you can sue him in a contrary action.
Given on the eighteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.
.


* TITLE LIX.
CONCERNING THE AUTHORITY WHICH SHOULD BE GRANTED BY A GUARDIAN OR CURATOR.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Antoniamis.
The absence of neither the guardian nor curator will prejudice, in any way, a
stipulation made in behalf of a ward or a minor.
Given without date, during the Consulate of the above-mentioned Emperors.
2. The Same Emperors and C&sars to Serena.
By releasing them while you were a minor without the authority of your
guardian, you can, by no means, lose your right of action.
Given on the seventeenth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 293.
3. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Gaius.
The prescription of long time does not protect anyone who has purchased
something from a ward without the authority of his guardian.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the
Csesars, 293.
4. The Emperor Justinian to John, Prtetorian Prefect.
In order to make Our statement clear to posterity, We order that guardians or
curators must, by all means, be present when minors under the age of twenty-
five years either institute criminal proceedings, or are defendants under
circumstances where the laws permit minors and wards to be accused, as it is
more prudent and better that minors should make their defences or prosecute
their cases with the full advice of their guardians, in order that they may not
either say or suppress anything through their want of experience or juvenile
impetuosity, which, if it had been stated on the one hand, or not
mentioned on the other, might have been of advantage to them, or have prevented
them from being injured.
Given at Constantinople, on the tenth of the Kalendsof March, after the fifth
Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes, 531.
5. The Same to John, Prsetorian Prefect.
Desiring to remove all doubt which formerly existed as to whether a single
testamentary guardian, or one appointed after investigation, could act by his
sole authority (even though there were several guardians who were not appointed
for different places), or whether all those who were legally or judicially
appointed could be compelled to give their consent, We order that where several
guardians have been appointed either by the will of the father, or called by
law, or named by the judge either after an investigation or without ceremony,
the consent of one guardian alone shall be sufficient, where the administration
is not divided either by localities, or by portions of the estate. For it is
necessary for each one to give his consent to the ward with reference to the
part of the estate, or the locality for which he has been designated, and We
order that, in this respect, testamentary guardians shall not differ from those
appointed after investigation, or such as are called by law, for which reason
they are all equally obliged to furnish security, and a subsidiary action in
favor of their wards will lie against them.
These provisions, however, must be understood only to be applicable where the
dissolution of the guardianship is involved, as, for instance, where the ward
desires to give himself in arrogation; for it would be absurd if the
guardianship should be abolished, not only without the consent, but perhaps
without the knowledge of the person appointed. For then, whether the guardians
are designated by will, or after investigation, or whether they are called by
law or appointed without ceremony, it is necessary for all of them to consent,
so that what concerns them all may be approved by all. These provisions must
likewise be observed with reference to curators.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof September, after the fifth Consulate
of Lampadius and Orestes, 531.



* TITLE LX.
WHEN GUARDIANS OR CURATORS CEASE TO DISCHARGE THE DUTIES OF THEIR OFFICE.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Hernula.
When curators are added to guardians, it is perfectly clear that the duties of
both are terminated by the arrival of the minor at the age of puberty, and
therefore that other curators should be appointed on account of the weakness
attaching to the age of the minors.
Given at Rome, on the fourth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of
Antoninus, Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Menippus.
It is perfectly evident that the duties of a guardian cannot be terminated
merely by the will of the ward.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 292.
3. The Emperor Justinian to Menna, Prsetorian Prefect.
Abolishing the indecent examination established for the purpose of ascertaining
the puberty of males, We order that just as females are considered to have
arrived at puberty after having completed their twelfth year, so, likewise,
males shall be held to have arrived at that age after having passed their
fourteenth year, and the disgraceful examination of the bodies of such persons
is hereby terminated.
Given at Constantinople, on the eighth of the Idesof April, during the
Consulate of Decius, 529.



* TITLE LXI.
CONCERNING THE APPOINTMENT OP AN AGENT BY A GUARDIAN OR CURATOR.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Alphocratio.
If your children, who are their own masters, have succeeded their mother,
although it may be shown that you were their guardian, still it is settled that
you may petition for their affairs to be managed during your absence, not by an
attorney, but by an agent appointed by you under a decree.
Given on the Nonesof January, during the Consulate of the Caesars, 293.



* TITLE LXII.
CONCERNING THE EXCUSES OF GUARDIANS AND CURATORS AND WHEN THEY MAY BE OFFERED.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Aviola.
You are laboring under an erroneous idea when you think that because you are an
eunuch you are exempt from performing the duties of guardianship.
Given on the Kalendsof May, under the Consulate of Chilo and Libo, 205.
2. The Same to Habentianus and Cosconius.
If you have been appointed curators in general terms, and it has not been
mentioned in the decree that you are only to discharge your duties in Italy,
you should go before a competent judge and obtain your release from
administration in the province. If this should be
done, the minors can petition to have curators appointed for them in the
province.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of Chilo
and Libo, 205.
3. The Same to Crispinus.
It is certain that if you, being freeborn, have been appointed guardian of a
freedman, you can be excused, but as the Governor of the province did not think
that you should be heard because your application was barred by prescription,
as you applied to him too late, and did not appeal from this decision, you are
advised that you must comply
with it.
Given on the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Albinus and
JElianus, 207.
4. The Emperor Antoninus to Agathus Demon.
It has been established by a Decree of the Senate that anyone who marries his
female ward is understood to contract an illegal marriage, and will be branded
with infamy. If, however, you, while absent and ignorant of the fact, were
appointed the curator of Demetria, to whom you were married, you can rest
secure, provided someone is substituted in your stead; for the ignorance of a
husband should not be considered as fraud under the Decree of the Senate.
Given on the eleventh of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Sabinus
and JSmilianus, 207.
5. The Emperor Alexander to Basilius.
The illustrious order of the Senate, at the suggestion of the Divine Marcus,
decreed that freedmen could, under no circumstances, be excused from the
guardianship or curatorship of the children of their patron or patroness;
therefore, it would be of no advantage to them to allege that they have been
appointed curators for said children, against the consent of their patron or
patroness, in order to avoid administering the guardianship of said children.
6. The Same to Maximian.
The same constitution which established the term of fifty days, within which
persons who have been appointed guardians or curators can excuse themselves,
also provided that the time shall run from the date when the decree of the
Praetor or the will of the father was brought to the attention of the person
appointed to discharge this duty. If, however, anyone, after the time when
notice was served upon him, should be unjustly treated by the court, and does
not appeal, he must comply with the decision.
Given on the third of the Nonesof May, during the Consulate of Julian, Consul
for the second time, and Crispinus, 225.
7. The Same to Antoninus.
No one is excused from guardianship or curatorship for the reason! that he is
either a creditor or a debtor of the person for whom he has]
been appointed; but he ought to have an associate, so that, if circumstances
should demand it, the minor who needs the assistance of others may be
protected.
Given on the third of the Idesof July, during the Consulate of Julian, Consul
for the second time, and Crispinus, 225.
8. The Same to Maximus.
Tenants, that is to say, the lessees of lands belonging to the Treasury, cannot
allege this as an excuse for exemption from civil functions, and therefore they
should discharge the duties of guardianship imposed upon them.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of Fuscus
and Dexter, 226.
9. The Same to Romanus.
Your brother should not be excused from guardianship or curator-ship for the
reason that he has lost an eye, hence you understand that he cannot avoid the
duty imposed upon him.
Given on the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of Modes-tus and Probus,
229.
10. The Same to Crispinus.
You should have had no doubt that collectors of taxes while performing their
duties are exempt, not only from civil charges, but also from guardianship.
Given on the Idesof August, during the Consulate of Alexander, Consul for the
third time, and Dio, 230.
11. The Same to Hylas.
You, having been appointed a testamentary guardian, should have applied within
fifty days to be excused from the administration of the property of your ward,
which is situated in another province from the one in which you are, and where
you reside. If you failed to do this, your application to be excused will be
barred by prescription; but if the Governor of the province is of the opinion
that you are not capable of administering the property, on account of its being
widely scattered, he will provide for curators to be joined with you in the
management of the same.
Given on the eighth of the Idesof December, during the Consulate of Pompeianus
and Pelignus, 232.
12. The Emperor Gordian to Valentine.
Voluntary acceptance of guardianship does, in no way, deprive a person of the
privileges to which he is entitled.
Given on the eleventh of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of Pius
and Pontianus, 239.
13. The Same to Apollinarus.
Neither the freedman of senators or others are exempt from civil charges merely
for the reason that they are transacting the business
of their patrons. The freedman of a senator, however, who is transacting the
affairs of his patron, may be excused from guardianship or curatorship.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of Gordian
and Aviola, 240.
14. The Same to Heraclida.
The Governor of the province must severely punish the magistrates who appointed
your uncle guardian, if he should ascertain that this has been done with the
expectation of his paying them money to be excused from performing his duties.
Hence if he is entitled to any excuse, and can show that he has not been
nominated for any other reason than to be annoyed by a lawsuit, he who
appointed him shall, in compliance with the terms of the constitution, be
required to return to him everything which he has expended in the proceedings.
Given on the Idesof September, during the Consulate of Gordian and Aviola, 240.
15. The Same to Taurus.
Although you have been retained in the guardianship because the excuse which
you offered was not accepted, and you have had recourse to an appeal, and, in
the meantime, the persons whom you mentioned have reached the age of puberty,
the examination of the appeal must, nevertheless, proceed in the manner
prescribed by law, on account of the risk attending the administration of the
trust.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of Arian
and Pappus, 244.
16. The Emperor Philip to Theodotus.
If (as you state) you have been appointed guardian of those with whom you have
a dispute concerning an estate, and, the time formerly prescribed within which
your excuse must be offered has not yet expired, you can appear before the
Governor of the province, who will render a decision in compliance with the
Decrees of the Emperors according to the importance of the case.
Given on the tenth' of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Peregrinus
and .ZEmilianus, 245.
17. The Emperors Gallienus and Valerian to Epagathus.
Although the question is not specifically mentioned in an Address of the Divine
Marcus on this subject, still, he who has been appointed curator of his
daughter-in-law after the marriage has taken place, should be excused, lest he
may act contrary to the terms of the said address and be guilty of want of
propriety.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof January, during the Consulate of Valerian,
Consul for the second time, and Lucian, 266.
18. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Sabinus and
Others.
It is a positive rule of law that guardians are not required to appeal after
having been appointed. Therefore, although you have not appealed, still, if you
think that you have a good excuse, you will not be prevented from presenting it
to the Governor of the province within the time prescribed by the Constitution
of the Divine Marcus. For the fact that the father of your ward has left the
usufruct of all his property to his former wife, as you allege, will not be
sufficient to release you from the guardianship.
Given on the Nonesof April, during the Consulate of the Caesars.
19. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Dionysius.
You desire something unusual when you petition to be excused from the
guardianship of a son, for the reason that you contend that his mother can sue
you by the contrary action of guardianship.
Without date or designation of consulate.
20. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Cratinus.
If you have been appointed the curator of minors whose guardian you previously
were, you cannot be required to administer the curator-ship against your will.
Hence, if the time prescribed for offering excuses has not yet expired, you can
make use of a proper defence.
Given at Nicomedia, on the tenth of the Kalendsof December, during the
Consulate of the Csesars.
21. The Same Emperors and Caesars to Parammon.
You have not a valid excuse for being released from guardianship, because you
allege that you hold property in common with your uterine brothers, as a
division of it can be made by the appointment of a curator.
Given at Nicomedia on the eighteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of the Csesars.
22. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Hermodorus.
If, after having been appointed guardian, your excuse has been admitted by the
Decree of the Governor, you will be released, for it is clear that no
responsibility for the administration will attach to you.
Given at Nicomedia, on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of the Csesars.
23. The Same Emperors and Ctesars to Neophytus.
The principles of humanity and affection do not permit you to be compelled to
bring suit against your sister or her children, on account of matters connected
with the guardianship, as the welfare of the ward himself, of whom you have
been appointed guardian, appears to require another course, that is to say,
that he should have a guardian who will not be prevented from conducting his
defence through affection for his adversary. Therefore, in accordance with the
rule which We
have formulated after having been consulted, you must go before the Praetor and
he will act in accordance with your wishes, as well as for the welfare of your
ward.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of Tuscus
and Amulinus, 295.
24. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Flavian, Prastorian Prefect.
We have, up to this time, granted exemption from guardianship or curatorship to
the owners of vessels, so that they are only required to serve in this capacity
where the minors belong to their association.
Given at Milan, on the third of the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors.
25. The Emperor Anastasius to Antiochus, Imperial Chamberlain.
We order that the illustrious men belonging to Our Imperial palace, known as
silentiarii,shall be exempt from guardianship and curator-ship while in
attendance on Our person.
Given on the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of John and Asclepio, 300.



* TITLE LXIII.
WHERE A GUARDIAN OR CURATOR HAS BEEN EXCUSED BY MEANS OF FALSE ALLEGATIONS.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Symmachus and Diotimus.
If, during the absence of your relatives or of those who have volunteered to
defend you, the person appointed your guardians or curators have caused
themselves to be released from the discharge of their duties by means of
improper allegations, in order that they may not profit by having deceived the
judge, the Governor of the province shall hear you, and if it appears that they
have extorted an unjust decree, he shall decide that they must assume the
responsibility for the administration from the time of their appointment.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and ^Elianus, 214.
2. The Emperor Philip and the Csesar Philip to Aulizanus.
It is clear that the guardians whom you assert have, after administering the
property of their wards, obtained their release from the Governor of the
province just as if they had done nothing with reference to the guardianship,
they can, by no means, avoid responsibility for the administration.
Given on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof June, during the Consulate of Philip
and Titian, 246.
3. The Same Emperors and C&ssars to Octavius.If (as you allege) the other party
has been excused from the administration of the guardianship or curatorship of
your brother and
yourself, rather through favor than for any lawful reason, he will not be
released from liability for the charge imposed upon him. Without date or
designation of consulate.



* TITLE LXIV. WHERE A GUARDIAN OR CURATOR is ABSENT ON BUSINESS FOR THE STATE.

1. The Emperor Gordian to Guttius.
Those who have been appointed guardians or curators, and are about to be absent
on public business, should have themselves excused for the time, in order that
they may not be held liable in the meanwhile. Therefore, if you have done this,
you ought not to be apprehensive of being called to account for the time during
which you were absent. If, however, you have neglected to do so, demand in
court that the person who administered the trust in your absence be sued first.
Given on the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Gordian and Aviola, 240.
2. The Same to Reginius.
It is certain that those guardians who have ceased to discharge their duties on
account of being absent on business for the State ought to be exempt for an
entire year following their return.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Gordian,
Consul for the second time, and Pompeianus, 242.



* TITLE LXV. CONCERNING THE EXCUSES OF VETERANS.

1. The Emperor Antoninus to Saturninus.
Those who have been honorably discharged after having served in the army for
twenty years, and retain their reputations untarnished, shall enjoy the
privileges conceded to veterans.
Given on the seventh of the Idesof August, during the Consulate of Antoninus,
Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
2. The Emperor Gordian to the Veteran Celer.
Although it has been decided that veterans can only be compelled to administer
the guardianship or curatorship of the sons of their fellow-veterans, or of
soldiers, and only one of these at a time, still, if they should be appointed
the guardians or curators of others, they must present their excuses before a
competent judge within the time prescribed by law.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Gordian and
Aviola, 240.



* TITLE LXVI.
CONCERNING THOSE WHO ARE EXCUSED ON ACCOUNT OF THE NUMBER OF THEIR CHILDREN.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Herodian.
Those who are appointed guardians or curators, and have three children at Rome,
concerning whose condition no doubt exists, or four in Italy, or five in the
provinces, have a right to be excused.
Given on the Nonesof April, during the Consulship of Geta and Plautianus, 204.
2. The Emperor Antoninus to Marcellus.
A deceased daughter is of no advantage to anyone for the purpose of declining
the acceptance of a municipal office, nor shall any grandchildren be counted
whose father is living, as they only benefit a father in a case of this kind.
Given on the Idesof June, during the Consulate of Antoninus, Consul for the
fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.



* TITLE LXVII.
CONCERNING THOSE WHO ARE EXCUSED ON ACCOUNT OF
ILLNESS.
1. The Emperor Philip, and the Czesar Philip, to Sabinus.
Anyone who is blind, deaf, dumb, insane, or is suffering from an incurable
chronic disease, has a valid excuse for declining a guardianship or
curatorship.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of
Praesens and Albinus, 247.



* TITLE LXVIII. WHO CAN BE EXCUSED ON ACCOUNT OF AGE.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Severus.
If your father is over seventy years of age, and is appointed either a guardian
or a curator, he can legally be excused.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof September, during the Consulate of Chilo and
Libo, 205.



* TITLE LXIX.
WHO CAN BE EXCUSED ON ACCOUNT OF THE NUMBER OF GUARDIANSHIPS.
1. The Emperor Severus and Antoninus to Pompeianus.If you are administering
three guardianships or curatorships at the same time, which you have not
undertaken without due considera-
tion, you shall not be oppressed with the responsibility of a fourth
guardianship or curatorship of guardians or minors. Where, however, your duties
have been terminated by the arrival of the wards at the age of puberty, or the
minors at majority, other trusts can be substituted for them, whose
administration you will be obliged to assume, even though you may not yet have
rendered your accounts of that of the former guardianships or curatorships.
Different kinds of excuses which are not well grounded, although they may be
mingled with good ones, are of no avail in obtaining a release; therefore you
should know that he who has two children and is administering two guardianships
is not entitled to be released from another to which he has been appointed.
Given on the fourth of the Idesof October, during the second Consulate of
Antoninus and Geta, 206.



* TITLE LXX. CONCERNING THE CURATOR OP AN INSANE PERSON OR A SPENDTHRIFT.

1. The Emperor Antoninus to Mariniana.
It is customary for curators to be appointed for spendthrifts and insane
persons, though they may have attained their majority.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Messala
and Sabinus, 215.

2. The Emperor Gordian to Avitius.
The benefit of the Rescript of the Divine Severus, by which the rustic estates
of wards or minors are forbidden to be sold or encumbered without a decree of
the Governor, does not cause any injury to the agnates of an insane person.
Hence, if a tract of land belonging to a person who has lost his mind is
encumbered to you by one of his agnates, by way of pledge, contrary to the
Decree of the Governor, the obligation of pledge with reference to it, will
stand; but you will have the right to an equitable personal action against him,
if the money which was loaned was employed for his benefit.
Given on the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of Pius and Pontianus,
239.

3. The Same to Aurelia.
If your father is not sane, petition to have curators appointed for him, by
means of whom, if any business he transacted should be revoked, after proper
examination, matters may be restored to their former condition.
Given on the seventh of the Idesof April, during the Consulate of Gordian and
Aviola, 240.

4. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Asclepiodotus.As you allege that the
mother of an insane woman, who is her own mistress, and repudiated her husband,
who alone had the right to
repudiate her, executed, along with him, certain instruments relating to the
affairs of her daughter, you are informed that she could not do anything
contrary to the interests of the said insane person, because she has legally no
right to represent her.
Given at Byzantium, during the Idesof April, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.

5. The Emperor Anastasius to the People.
In order that We may not appear to have intended to unduly benefit an
emancipated brother or brothers, in their succession to other brothers, without
imposing upon them the burdens of guardianship, We decree by the terms of this
law that, notwithstanding the provision of the Twelve Tables concerning the
appointment of curators, they can legally be appointed for their insane
brothers and sisters.

6. The Emperor Justinian to Julian, Prietorian Prefect.
It sometimes happens that the affliction of insane men remains continuous, and
with others the attacks of disease are suspended, and lucid intervals occur,
and in this latter instance a great difference exists, for some of the lucid
intervals are short, and others are of long duration. In former times the
question arose whether the authority of the curator continued to exist during
the lucid intervals of insanity, when it temporarily ceased, and when the
disease returned, it was restored. Hence We, desiring to decide this doubtful
point, do hereby decree that, as when insane persons of this kind recover their
senses it is uncertain and impossible to determine whether this will endure for
a long or for a short period, and as the parties in question frequently remain
on the border line of insanity and health, and after they continue for a
considerable time in this condition, the lunacy seems in some cases to be
removed, We decree that the appointment of the curator shall not be considered
as ended, but to exist as long as the insane person lives, for generally a
disease of this kind is incurable; and We also decree that, during their
perfectly lucid intervals, the curator shall not exercise his authority, and
that the demented person, while he is temporarily in possession of his senses,
can enter upon an estate and do everything else which sane men are competent to
do.
If, however, he should again become insane, the curator must intervene in his
affairs, so that everything may be done in the name of the latter, as often as
the disease returns, in order that the appointment of a curator may not be made
frequently, or in such a way as to be ridiculous, and seem to be appointed as
often as he is required to cease to exercise his functions.
Given on the Kalendsof September, during the fifth Consulate of Lampadius and
Orestes, 530.

7. The Same to Julian, Prsetorian Prefect.
An insane person, who remains constantly under the care of his parents,
undoubtedly cannot have a curator, for paternal solicitude is sufficient for
the management of his property, which he obtained as
castrense peculium,or from other sources, whether he acquired it before he
became insane, or whether it came into his hands while he was in that
condition; and this also applies to the cases of those who have only the mere
ownership of property. For where can such affection as influences a father be
found in a stranger? Or to whom is the authority of managing the property of
children to be entrusted, if their parents are excluded? Although Tertullian,
the interpreter of the ancient law, in the single book which he wrote on
castrense peculium,appears to have discussed this point in an obscure manner,
We now have stated it with perfect clearness.
(1) When, however, the parents of an insane person happen to die, Our
Constitution, which We have promulgated with reference to what should be left
to an insane person by will, as well as concerning the substitution which can
be made on his account, shall remain in full force.
(2) But where a man incurably insane is legally his own master, there is no
doubt that, under the ancient law, he can share in the estate of his father
which has been left to his children, when it plainly appears that he is a
proper heir of his parents.
(3) If, however, for any cause, another inheritance or succession should
descend to him, then a great and inexplicable doubt arose under the ancient law
whether, while still insane, he should be admitted to enter upon the estate, or
demand praetorian possession of the same, or not; and whether his curator could
be permitted to demand praetorian possession of the estate. An important
discussion on both sides of this question took place among jurists. Hence We,
for the purpose of reconciling the authorities, do hereby decree that an insane
person can, under no circumstances, accept an estate or obtain praetorian
possession of it; but We grant permission to his curator, nay more, We require
him, if he should think that the succession would be advantageous, to accept
the prsetorian possession of the estate which resembles that formerly granted
by a decree, as the demand for it was abolished by a law of the Emperor
Constantine, by which a new proceeding was introduced which took the place of
the ancient application.
(4) As the ancients established many regulations with reference to the
appointment of a curator of an insane person, for example, in what manner a
bond or security should be furnished by him with reference to certain property
and certain persons, as they were in doubt whether every curator should furnish
the same security, it appears necessary to Us, having a view to the interests
of the human race, to remove all this obscurity and inextricable confusion, and
provide for the entire matter a complete and luminous remedy. And as We first
issued a decree authorizing the appointment of a curator for insane persons of
both sexes, We now proceed to the consideration and removal of other
difficulties.
(5) Where a father, in his last will, by which he either appointed or
disinherited his heirs, designated a curator for an insane son or daughter,
when it is necessary for security to be given, the will of the father is
sufficient, and the person appointed shall obtain the curator-
ship, provided that, in this most flourishing City he appears before the
Prefect of the same, and in a province before its Governor in the presence of
the most pious bishop of the diocese and his three coadjutors, and, having
placed his hands on the most Holy Gospels, he declares that he will conduct all
the affairs of the said insane person lawfully and for his benefit, and that he
will not omit anything which he may think to be for his welfare, or permit
anything to be done which he believes will be to his disadvantage.

Extract from, Novel 72, Last Chapter. Latin Text.

Generally speaking, this oath is required of all curators, but they are not exempt from rendering accounts. The same rule applies to
guardians.

END OP THE EXTRACT.
THE TEXT OF THE CODE FOLLOWS.

The curator shall undertake the administration of the estate after an inventory
has been publicly drawn up with all the requisite formalities, and he can
dispose of said estate as he may desire, his own property being hypothecated as
security for his administration, as in the case of the guardians and curators
of minors.
(6) If, however, the father did not execute a will, and the law calls an agnate
as the curator, or if there is none, or a suitable one does not exist, it will
be necessary for a curator to be appointed by the court; and in this instance,
the appointment shall be made according to the aforesaid division, in this most
nourishing City before the most distinguished Urban Prefect, but if the said
insane person is of noble birth, the Senate must be called together, and, after
investigation, a curator of the best reputation and the highest integrity shall
be appointed. Where no such person can be found, the appointment shall be made
under the sole direction of the most distinguished Urban Prefect.
Where the curator is the possessor of a considerable amount of property, this
will suffice for the faithful management of his trust, and his appointment can
be made without his being obliged to furnish security. If, however, it should
be ascertained that he does not possess sufficient property, then the best
security possible shall be required of him; and in every instance his
appointment shall, by all means, be made with his hands placed on the Most Holy
Scriptures.
The curator himself, no matter what his wealth or rank may be, must take the
aforesaid oath to properly manage the affairs of the trust, and draw up a
public inventory, in order that all the estate of the insane person may be
everywhere administered as well as possible. In the appointment of the above-
mentioned curator all these formalities must be observed in the provinces
before the Governor of the same, and the most reverend bishop of the diocese,
and his three coadjutors. The regulations concerning the appointment, the oath,
and the inventory, the security, and the hypothecation of the property of the
curator, must by all means be complied with.
(7) When the curator of an insane person has been appointed in this manner, and
the said insane person afterwards becomes entitled to any property either by
inheritance, succession, legacy, trust, or from any other source whatsoever, it
shall be added to his estate, and, together with the remainder, be given into
the hands of the curator, he of course making an inventory of all said
property, and it shall remain in his charge; but if the insane person should
afterwards recover his senses, and approve of the acquisition of said property,
it shall be restored to him.
(8) If, however, the insane person should die in that condition, or, having
recovered his senses, should reject the property, for example it should be an
inheritance, it will go to those who have been substituted for him if they are
willing to accept it, or to the heirs at law, and in their default, to Our
Treasury. It must, however, be observed that those persons are entitled to the
succession who were the next of kin to the insane person at the time of his
death, provided that, when they are called to the succession, the person has
not in the meantime been insane. All securities or bonds which the authorities
of the ancient law introduced, and which have caused inextricable confusion,
are hereby absolutely abolished. All legacies, trusts, and other acquisitions
obtained by the insane person should undoubtedly be added to the remainder of
his estate.
(9) If, however, he should recover his senses, and be unwilling to accept the
property, and should openly reject it, or his heirs should do the same thing,
it must at once be separated from the remainder of his estate, just as if it
had never belonged to it in the first place, and should pass by lawful descent
in such a way as to neither be a disadvantage nor a benefit to the estate of
the said insane person.
(10) If, however, the curator of the insane person who was appointed in
accordance with the provisions of Our laws should die, another shall be
appointed in the same manner and with the same formalities, just as if the
first one had been found to be liable to suspicion, and the other was
subrogated to him. This rule, also, was established by the ancient laws.
(11) All these regulations relating to the appointment of curators which have
been introduced by this new law are applicable to future cases, and any
curators which have previously been appointed shall not be removed on account
of it; nor shall any new restrictions be imposed upon them, but, having been
appointed under the ancient law, its rules having reference to their
appointment shall remain unaltered. No bond or security formerly required in
the succession to which insane persons are entitled shall be furnished.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof September, during the fifth Consulate
of Lampadius and Orestes, 530.


* TITLE LXXI. LANDS AND OTHER PROPERTY BELONGING TO MINORS SHALL NOT BE ALIENATED OR ENCUMBERED WITHOUT A DECREE.


1. The Emperor Antoninus to Minutianus.
The sale of a tract of land made on account of its having been pledged and in
pursuance of a judicial decision is not included in the Decree of the Senate
which provides that the real property of wards or minors shall not be
alienated, unless this is done by the authority of the Prsetor or Governor of
the province. If, however, you are of such an age as to be entitled to relief,
having applied to a competent judge, he will order that complete restitution be
given you, after having examined the case in the presence of the adverse party.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the
two Aspers, 213.

2. The Emperor Gordian to Clearchus and Others.
It is not necessary for you to demand complete restitution, if your guardians
or curators have sold the property without the authority of a decree, even
though it may have been hypothecated. If, however, the creditors did this, you
will be entitled to the benefit of the Edict, if the sale was fraudulent, and
it is shown that you have sustained injury with the connivance of the
purchaser.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of Gordian
and Aviola, 240.

3. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to Theodosius and Others.
As the property which you acquired after you were emancipated could not have
been alienated by your father as your curator, without the authority of the
Governor, especially if the said property was sold by him as his, and not as
belonging to you, you have a right to recover
it by law.
Given on the third of the Nonesof January, during the Consulate
of Tuscus and Bassus, 259.

4. The Same to Mithridates.
Neither urban estates nor property in a city can be sold or alienated by wards
or minors, and it cannot be transferred from their ownership either by means of
set-off or exchange, and much less by gift, or in any other way, without a
decree of court. Hence, if you have conveyed a tract of land to your brothers
by way of set-off, you can bring suit to recover it, and if, on the other hand,
you have obtained anything from them under the same contract, you should return
it.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Secularis,
Consul for the second time, and Donatus, 261.

5. The Same to Serenus.
Although the Governor decided that an urban or rustic estate belonging to a
ward could be alienated or encumbered, still, the Senate
reserved a right of action in favor of the ward if he could prove that the
judge had been deceived by false allegations, and you also are not forbidden to
institute proceedings of this kind.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Secularis,
Consul for the second time, and Donatus, 261.

6. The Emperors Cams, Carinus, and Numerianus to Varus.
The sale of the real property of minors cannot be made through an application
made by an attorney to the Prastor, or the Governor of a province, as this
cannot legally take place unless documents are produced before either of the
above-mentioned officials, which show the necessity of the sale, and a decree
to that effect is formally issued.
Given on the Nonesof May, under the Consulate of Carus and Carinus, 283.

7. The Same Emperors to Isidor.
If, while you were a minor under the age of twenty-five years, you executed a
bond to your father for the return of a donation which he made to you when you
were emancipated, as an instrument of this kind is in violation of the Decree
of the Senate, it will not prejudice your rights.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof December, during the Consulate of Carus and
Carinus, 283.

8. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Theodota.
It is clear that the ownership of the rustic estates which', in violation of
the Decree of the Senate, were given to you before marriage as a betrothal gift
(this having been done at your request) cannot be transferred to you, as this
has been prohibited by law, they will remain part of the property of your
husband.
Given on the third of the Nonesof November, during the Consulate of Diocletian
and Aristobolus, 285.

9. The Same Emperors to Mutianus.
Although he who you allege sold the rustic estate of a minor did so at the time
when he was acting as curator, the sale having been made contrary to the terms
of the Rescript of the Divine Severus, it was very properly set aside by the
decision of the Governor. You will not, however, be prevented from claiming the
pledges of his own property which the curator encumbered as a guarantee against
eviction.
Given during the Nonesof November, during the Consulate of Diocletian and
Aristobolus, 285.

10. The Same to Gratits.
The Governor will grant you relief in your claim for the ownership of lands
which were alienated without the authority of a decree, and if he should
ascertain that the entire amount of the purchase-money paid to your curator was
not added to your property, he will allow you to
be sued only for that amount which may be proved to have been expended for your
benefit, or added to your estate.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof August, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.

11. The Same to Trophinus.
If your patron, who is a minor, sold your rustic estate without the authority
of a judicial decision, it is unnecessary to mention the low price at which it
was sold, as the Decree of the Senate prohibits an alienation of this kind, and
the title does not pass. If, however, acting under the authority of a decree,
he sold the said land at a very low price, he being ignorant of the true value
of the same, complete restitution in accordance with the terms of the Perpetual
Edict will, after proper investigation, be granted you.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors.

12. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Leontius.The rustic estate of a minor,
situated in a province, can only be sold on account of a debt after a decree of
the Governor has been
issued.
Given at Heraclea, on the second of the Kalendsof May, during the
Consulate of the Csesars.

13. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Zenophila.
It is not lawful for a rustic estate belonging to a minor, whether the same be
tributary, patrimonial, or emphyteutical, to be sold without a decree of the
Governor.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of the
Csesars.

14. The Same Emperors and Csssars to Phrominius.
Adopt the opinion of the most learned Papinianus and the other authorities whom
you have mentioned in your petition, and file an exception on the ground of bad
faith, if the wards demand the principal and interest which belongs to the
Treasury, and you can prove that they did not tender you the amount of the debt
paid on their account, and they claim the lands in the province which, with
their crops, were sold without the authority of a Decree of the Governor.
Given on the ninth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the
Caesars.

15. The Same Emperors and Caesars to Sabina.
If, while you were a minor under the age of twenty-five years, you gave in
payment a certain rustic estate when you should have given another, the Decree
of the Senate does not permit you to be deprived of the ownership of the
property.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the
Caesars.
 ---

16. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Eutychia.
If, while you were a minor, you sold a rustic or urban estate (as not the
situation of the latter, but its nature, should be considered), and you did
this with the authority of your guardian, or, being beyond the age of puberty,
you acted without the Decree of the Governor of the province in which the
property was situated, by the terms of the Decree of the Senate you cannot be
deprived of its ownership or your rights to the same, but an action will lie in
your favor for its recovery, together with its crops, and if there are none of
the latter, you will be entitled to a personal action. If, however, the
purchaser can prove that he could not pay your expenses or discharge your
obligations out of his other property, and that besides the money received by
way of price has been entirely expended for your benefit, he can, by the aid of
an exception oh the ground of bad faith, contest your claim, until you repay
him the purchase-money and interest which you have received, as well as the
expenses which he has incurred for the improvement of the land.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof April, during the Consulate of the Csesars.
17. The Emperors and the Csesars to Philip.
The terms of the Decree of the Senate do not permit land held in common by
minors to be disposed of without a decision of the Governor of the province,
for it was long since settled that an alienation of such property cannot be
made without a judicial decree, except where the person having the largest
share demands a division of the same.
18. The Emperor Constantine and the Cassar Constantine to Severus.
Where minors, either in the name of their father or on their own account, are
oppressed with debts, whether they are due to the Treasury or to private
individuals, the Constantinian Prsetor, after having examined the case, shall
render a decree confirming the sale, if the truth of the allegations should be
established.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of
Probianus and Julian, 322.


* TITLE LXXII. WHEN THERE is NO NEED OF A DECREE.

1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Valentinus.
If you can prove that the father of the ward, against whose guardians you have
brought suit, consented that the land should be transferred to you if he
received the price of the same, the agreement shall be observed. In this case,
the authority of the Governor is not necessary, as the interests of the
guardians will be protected if the latter conform to the will of the deceased.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of Antoninus
and Geta, 306.
2. The Emperor Aurelian to Pulcher.
It was necessary to ascertain whether the illustrious Saturninus, having
appeared before the Emperor, received a special right to make the sale, for the
consent of the Emperor takes the place of a decree of the Governor.
Given during the Idesof January ....
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Stratonicianus.
A rustic or an urban estate can, under no circumstances, be alienated by a
minor under the age of twenty-five years without a decree of the Governor,
unless a will of his father, or that of the testator whose estate has come into
the hands of the minor, is understood to have made provision for such
alienation.
Given at Nicomedia, on the twelfth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate
of the above-mentioned Emperors.
4. The Emperor Constantine to the People.
We permit the guardians and curators of persons of every description to sell
clothing which is worn, and superfluous animals, without the authority of a
decree.
Given on the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Constantine, Consul for the
seventh time, and the Caesar Constantius, Consul for the fourth time, 326.


* TITLE LXXIII. WHERE ANYONE, NOT BEING AWARE THAT PROPERTY BELONGS TO A MINOR, PURCHASES IT WITHOUT A DECREE.

1. The Emperor Gordian to Felix.
If she who succeeded to the rights of the guardian, either by an hereditary or
a praetorian title, should sell your land as belonging to a ward, the purchaser
who knowingly bought it from the heir of the deceased guardian can acquire no
defence by prescription through the purchase of another's property. If,
however, the heir sold the property as his own, and the purchaser ignorantly
bought it as belonging to another, he does not immediately become the owner of
the land by delivery, but he can only make use of the defence of prescription
for the established time, as you do not deny that you are of lawful age.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof September, during the Consulate of Pius and
Pontianus, 239.
2. The Same to Crispina.
If your property has been sold contrary to the Decree of the Senate, bring suit
against the possessor of the same, so that if you can prove the fact, you may
recover possession, and all the profits may be restored to you, especially if
it is established that he who bought it is not a bona fidepurchaser.
Given on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof . . . , during the Consulate of
Gordian, Consul for the second time, and Pompeianus, 242.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Agatha.
Your rustic or urban estates which have been alienated contrary to the Decree
of the Senate, without investigation, or the promulgation of any decree, are
not legally held even by a second purchaser, unless the time fixed by law has
elapsed.
Given at Nicomedia on the Idesof February, during the Consulate of the Csesars.
4. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Alexander.
As the property in question was transferred as against the purchaser to him to
whom the property was donated contrary to the Decree of the Senate, and then
acquired by a lawful title, it must be ascertained whether the present owner
has held said property without dispute and in good faith for the term of ten
years, the former owner being present; or whether the latter being absent, the
defendant is shown to have been the undisputed possessor for the term of twenty
years. If this should be plainly established before you, the claimant must be
excluded without delay on the ground of long-time prescription.
Given on the Idesof June, during the Consulate of the Caesars.


* TITLE LXXIV. WHERE A MINOR, AFTER ATTAINING His MAJORITY, RATIFIES AN ALIENATION MADE WITHOUT A DECREE.

1. The Emperor Gordian to Licinia.
You allege that your father's curator sold a rustic estate to the heir of the
creditor, or the former guardian of your father, without obtaining a Decree
from the Governor, and that your father, having been deceived, ratified the
sale. If it should be proved that the land was sold for too low a price, and
that your father, having been led into error, consented to the sale through
mistake, it is not unreasonable that what is lacking of the proper price should
be paid. This should be ordered by the Governor of the province, who must know
that if the other party did not act in good faith, he should be given the
choice of returning the land with the profits, or of making up the deficiency
by paying the money with the lawful interest.
Given on the Nonesof October, during the Consulate of Pius and Pontianus, 239.
2. The Same to Alexander.
If your lands have been alienated by your guardian without the authority of a
decree, and you have not expressly confirmed the sale, or if the possessor is
one in good faith, but has not had possession for a sufficient time to render
legal what in the first place was wrongfully
done, the Governor of the province shall order the property to be returned to
you.
Given on the seventh of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of Pius and
Pontianus, 239.
3. The Emperor Justinian to Menna, Prsetorian Prefect.
Where the property of minors has been alienated or encumbered without a decree,
while they were still in charge of regularly appointed curators, or the said
minors, having attained their majority, have been released from their care
through the benefit of age, and, after a long silence, have filed a complaint
on this ground, so that the illegal alienation or encumbrance has been
confirmed by their protracted silence, We decree that a certain time shall be
fixed for the establishment of such a confirmation. Therefore We order that if
no complaint is made with reference to an alienation or encumbrance of this
kind, for the term of five continuous years after the minor has attained his
majority, that is to say, after he has reached the full age of twenty-five
years, by him who did this, or his heir, the act can, by no means, be revoked
under the pretext of the omission of judicial sanction, but shall stand, just
as if the property had been legally alienated or encumbered in the beginning by
virtue of a lawful decree.
Donations by minors cannot be confirmed by a decree, for even if, after they
are entitled to the benefit of age, they should transfer any immovable property
to another as a donation (except in the case of one made in consideration of
marriage), this cannot be confirmed, unless the donor should acquiesce, and ten
years have elapsed after the minor has reached the age of twenty-five years,
the parties being present; or twenty years after, if they are absent; so that,
in the case of an heir, the time only can be counted which passed in silence
after the latter attained his majority.
Given on the Idesof April, during the fifth Consulate of Decius, 529.


* TITLE LXXV. CONCERNING LEGAL PROCEEDINGS TO BE INSTITUTED AGAINST MAGISTRATES.

1. The Emperor Antoninus to Mutianus.
If the magistrates by whom guardians or curators were appointed for you
compelled them to stipulate in their own names that they would make good any
losses, and if anything was paid they would receive it, and they took sureties
for this purpose, the actions which you have brought against your guardians or
curators will not annul the obligation against the magistrates for any amount
over and above that which is secured.
A praetorian action can be brought by you against the magistrates who appointed
the curators, if, after having exhausted all their property, and having
recovered what is proved to have been fraudulently
alienated, you have not been satisfied in full. If you bring such a suit, and
the magistrates assign to you their rights of action against the sureties whom
they have accepted, you can proceed against them, although you have a
prsetorian action without the assignment.
Given on the Nonesof January, during the Consulate of the two Aspers, 213.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Paternus.
An action is not usually granted against the heirs of a magistrate, when a
guardian has not been guilty of gross negligence in providing proper security
for his ward.
Given on the third of the Nonesof July, during the Consulate of Julian, Consul
for the second time, and Crispinus, 225.
3. The Emperor Gordian to Probianus.
If you and your colleague, while discharging the duties of the magistracy,
appointed a guardian who was insolvent, without requiring him to furnish proper
security, the ward cannot be indemnified except by calling both of you to
account, and you will not unjustly demand that a right of action be granted you
for your colleague's share of the liability.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of Pius and
Pontianus, 239.
4. The Same to Anuntianus.
Proceedings cannot be instituted against a person who has appointed an
insolvent guardian or curator before the property of the latter, as well as
that of his surety and his colleagues, has been exhausted, as you have assumed
the risk of the administration together, and the ward or minor has not been
fully indemnified.
Given during the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Atticus and
Prsetextatus, 243.
5. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Eugenia.
With reference to municipal magistrates who have appointed guardians, it is
established by a Decree of the Senate proposed by Our Divine Father, Trajan,
that if the said guardians, at the end of their administration, should prove to
be insolvent, and the entire amount cannot be collected from the surety; an
equitable action for the deficiency will lie in favor of the wards against the
magistrates.
Given on the seventh of the Idesof December, during the Consulate of the same
Emperors.
6. The Emperor Zeno to &lianus, Prsetorian Prefect.
When, as is customary, a decree of appointment was added to the decision of the
Pra?tor authorizing the general administration of a curator, it is clear that
the appointment is not valid; but it is the fault of the clerk who, in
appraising the property of the minor, did not assign to the estate a value of
more than two hundred pounds of gold, and accepted security for that amount.
In this instance, the account of the curator should not be called in question,
if any injury to the property of the minor is proved to have resulted contrary
to the provisions of the law, but legal proceedings should be instituted on the
ground of the negligence or fraud of the clerk, who suffered the true valuation
of the property of the minor
to be concealed.  ---  -> ,_Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof January,
during the Consulate
of Basilius.
