# -*- mode: org -*-

THE CODE OF OUR LORD THE MOST HOLY
EMPEROR JUSTINIAN.
SECOND EDITION.


BOOK III.
TITLE I. CONCERNING JUDGMENTS .......................................... 258
TITLE II.
CONCERNING THE COSTS AND EXPENSES INCURRED IN DIFFERENT CASES, AND THE
EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF THE COURT .................... 267
TITLE III. CONCERNING SPECIAL JUDGES ...................................... 268
TITLE IV.
WHAT JUDGES CAN DELEGATE THEIR JURISDICTION, AND WHO CAN BE DELEGATED
.................................................. 269
TITLE V.
No ONE SHALL DECIDE HIS OWN CASE OR INTERPRET THE LAW FOR HIMSELF
........................................................ 270
TITLE VI. WHO HAVE THE RIGHT TO APPEAR IN COURT, AND WHO HAVE NOT ...... 270
TITLE VII.
No ONE SHALL BE COMPELLED AGAINST HIS WILL TO BRING AN ACTION, OR TO ACCUSE
ANOTHER ....................................... 271
TITLE VIII. CONCERNING THE ORDER OF JUDGMENTS ............................. 271
TITLE IX. CONCERNING JOINDER OF ISSUE ..................................... 272
TITLE X. CONCERNING CLAIMS FOR MORE THAN IS DUE ........................ 273
TITLE XI. CONCERNING DELAYS ............................................. 273
TITLE XII. CONCERNING FESTIVALS ........................................... 275
TITLE XIII.
CONCERNING THE JURISDICTION OF ALL JUDGES AND THE COMPETENCY OF TRIBUNALS
.................................................. 278
TITLE XIV.
WHEN THE EMPEROR TAKES COGNIZANCE OF THE CASES OF MINORS, WIDOWS, OR OTHER
PERSONS WORTHY OF PITY, THEY SHALL NOT BE COMPELLED TO APPEAR
........................................ 280
TITLE XV. WHERE IT Is NECESSARY TO PROCEED IN CRIMINAL CASES ............. 280
TITLE XVI. WHERE AN ACTION TO OBTAIN POSSESSION MUST BE BROUGHT ......... 281
TITLE XVII. WHERE THE EXECUTION OF A TRUST SHOULD BE DEMANDED ........... 281
TITLE XVIII.
WHERE HE WHO PROMISED TO MAKE PAYMENT IN A CERTAIN PLACE SHOULD BE SUED
............................................ 282
TITLE XIX. WHERE AN ACTION IN REM SHOULD BE BROUGHT .................... 282
TITLE XX.
WHERE AN ACTION RELATING TO AN ESTATE SHOULD BE BROUGHT, AND WHERE TESTAMENTARY
HEIRS SHOULD DEMAND TO BE PLACED IN POSSESSION OF THE SAME
..................................... 283
TITLE XXI.
WHERE AN ACTION TO COMPEL THE PRODUCTION OF EITHER PUBLIC OR PRIVATE ACCOUNTS
SHOULD BE BROUGHT ....................... 283
TITLE XXII.
WHERE SUITS WITH REFERENCE TO THE CONDITION OF PERSONS SHOULD BE BROUGHT
................................................ 284
TITLE XXIII.
WHERE ANYONE BELONGING TO THE CURIन, OR THE COURT ATTENDANTS, OR OF ANY OTHER
CONDITION, CAN BE SUED ................... 285
TITLE XXIV.
WHERE SENATORS OR PERSONS OF ILLUSTRIOUS RANK MAY BE PROCEEDED AGAINST EITHER
CIVILLY OR CRIMINALLY ....................... 286
TITLE XXV.
IN WHAT CASES SOLDIERS CANNOT AVAIL THEMSELVES OF AN EXCEPTION ON THE GROUND OF
JURISDICTION .............................. 288
TITLE XXVI.
WHERE CASES RELATING TO THE PUBLIC TREASURY OR THE IMPERIAL PALACE, OF TO
PERSONS ATTACHED TO THE SAME, SHALL BE BROUGHT
.................................................... 289
TITLE XXVII.
WHERE ANYONE MAY BE PERMITTED TO AVENGE HIMSELF OR THE PUBLIC, WITHOUT APPLYING
TO THE JUDGE ............................. 291
TITLE XXVIII. CONCERNING INOFFICIOUS WILLS ...................................
291
TITLE XXIX. CONCERNING INOFFICIOUS DONATIONS ...............................
305
TITLE XXX. CONCERNING INOFFICIOUS DOWRIES ................................. 307
TITLE XXXI. CONCERNING THE DEMANDS FOR AN ESTATE ......................... 308
TITLE XXXII. CONCERNING THE ACTION FOR THE RECOVERY OF PROPERTY ............
311
TITLE XXXIII. CONCERNING USUFRUCT, LODGING, AND THE SERVICE OF SLAVES .........
317
TITLE XXXIV. CONCERNING SERVITUDES AND WATER ...............................
323
TITLE XXXV. CONCERNING THE AQUILIAN LAW ................................... 326
TITLE XXXVI. CONCERNING THE ACTION IN PARTITION .............................
327
TITLE XXXVII. CONCERNING THE DIVISION OF PROPERTY OWNED IN COMMON ..........
332
TITLE XXXVIII.
MATTERS WHICH APPLY TO BOTH THE ACTION IN PARTITION AND THAT FOR THE DIVISION
OF PROPERTY OWNED IN COMMON .............. 334
TITLE XXXIX. CONCERNING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF BOUNDARIES ................... 337
TITLE XL. CONCERNING PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE SAME CASE ................ 339
TITLE XLI. CONCERNING NOXAL ACTIONS ...................................... 339
TITLE XLII.
CONCERNING THE ACTION TO COMPEL THE PRODUCTION OF PROPERTY IN COURT
....................................................... 341
TITLE XLIII. CONCERNING GAMBLERS AND GAMES OF CHANCE ..................... 342
TITLE XLIV. CONCERNING RELIGIOUS PLACES, AND THE EXPENSES OF FUNERALS ......
343


BOOK III.

TITLE I. CONCERNING JUDGMENTS.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Clement.
A stipulation for the payment of interest does not lose its effect after suit
has been brought, hence the result will be that you can sue your debtor for
interest incurred during the proceedings which was not included in the
judgment.
Given on the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Antoninus and Geta, both
Consuls for the second time, 209.
2. The Same to Valerius.
Although judgment may have been rendered in a suit which you brought against
your guardian, still, the right of action on guardianship is not extinguished,
and therefore if you again institute proceedings before the same judge, and an
exception on the ground of res judicatais interposed against you, you can
properly avail yourself of a reply based on malicious fraud if you allege that
the claim in the present action is not the same as the one which was disposed
of in the former one.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of Faustinus
and Rufinus, 211.
3. The Emperor Alexander to Faustina.
Whenever the question of a person's condition arises, where the title to
property is involved, there is nothing to prevent the magistrate, who, in every
other instance, cannot take cognizance of the question of condition, from
deciding the controversy.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof February, during the Consulate of Julian,
Consul for the second time, and Crispinus, 229.
4. The Same to Popilius.
If, after the price of land purchased by your curators has been paid, and the
instruments evidencing the sale have been delivered, you have not brought
forward the question of omission of guarantee in case of eviction, you
understand that when the case has once been decided it cannot be renewed.
Given on the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Modestus and Probus,
229.
5. The Emperor Gordian to Marcellus.
When one judge is delegated by another, he has no power to designate a third,
as he himself performs judicial functions, unless he was appointed by the
Emperor himself.
Given on the fourth of the Nonesof September, during the Consulate of Pius and
Pontianus, 239.
6. The Same to Junia.
A slave cannot interfere with a judgment, and if no decree of condemnation has
been issued against him, what has been decided shall stand.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Gordian and Aviola, 240.
7. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Hyrina.
When you allege that a slave of your debtor, who has been pledged to you, holds
certain property of his deceased master, you ask, contrary to law, that actions
be granted against him; for as no suit can be brought between a slave and a
freeman, it is more proper for you to apply to the court to give you possession
of the property pledged than to demand what is illegal.
Given on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.
8. The Emperors Constantine and Licinius to Dionysius.
It has been decided that, in all things, the principles of justice and equity,
rather than the strict rules of law, should be observed.
Given on the Idesof May, during the Consulate of Volusianus and Annianus, 314.
9. The Emperor Constantine to Maximus.
It is necessary for judges, in the first place, thoroughly to examine the
character of the matter in dispute, and then to interrogate both parties
frequently as to whether they desire to add anything, as this is a benefit to
both of them, whether the case is to be decided by the judge, or is to be
referred to someone higher in authority.
Given on the second of the Idesof January, during the Consulate of Licinius and
Crispus, 316.
Extract from Novel 116, Chapter II. Latin Text.
When one party has stated his case, but the other alleges that he still has
something to advance, We order that the judge shall compel the latter who asks
for postponement, without fail or further delay, to set forth explicitly what
he wishes, within thirty days after the other party has filed his complaint;
and if he does not do so, the judge shall grant him another month for the
purpose of conquering his obstinacy; and if he should still delay, another
shall be given him, so that if he does not make his allegations within the
three months aforesaid, the magistrate having jurisdiction of the suit shall
not wait any longer, but shall render his decision in conformity to all laws
and customs; or, if he should be unwilling to do so, he must make a report, so
that evil-disposed litigants may not be permitted to defer a decision for a
longer time.
10. The Same to Severus, Urban Prefect.
A hearing should absolutely be refused to a person who divides a case which
should be determined without it, and, as a privilege, desires to try before
several judges what can be decided by one and the same magistrate. It is the
duty of a judge to punish anyone who presents a petition contrary to this law,
and having made a demand for possession before one judge, attempts to have the
principal question in the case disposed of by another.
11. The Emperor Justinian to Julian, Praetorian Prefect.
In order to prevent litigation from becoming almost perpetual and exceeding the
term of human life (as Our law has already limited criminal cases to two years,
and pecuniary actions more frequently occur, and are known sometimes to give
rise to criminal proceedings), it seems to Us to be advisable to promulgate the
present law, for the purpose of regulating such matters throughout the entire
earth, so that it may not be subject to limitation by either space or time.
(1) Therefore, We decree that all suits which are brought for the recovery of
any sum of money whatsoever, or with reference to civil conditions, the rights
of cities or of private individuals; the possession, ownership, or
hypothecation of property, servitudes; or any other questions on account of
which litigation occurs between men; with the sole exception of such cases as
involve the rights of the Treasury, or the discharge of official duties, shall
not, after issue has been joined, be deferred longer than the term of three
years.
All judges, either in this Fair City or in the provinces, whether they are
invested with inferior or superior jurisdiction, or discharge the functions of
magistrates, or have been appointed by Us, or by Our nobles, shall not be
permitted to protract cases for a longer time than the term of three years, for
no one is not aware that this provision is superior to any judicial authority,
and if the parties themselves should not acquiesce, no one can be found who
will be bold enough to postpone a case against the consent of the judge.
(2) If, however, the plaintiff should cease to prosecute his case, and the
defendant should be wearied with the long delay, and the term of three years
after the joinder of issue should be approaching its end, so that only six
months remain, the judge, after the defendant has complained of the plaintiff's
absence and the matter has been duly considered, is authorized to seek him out
by means of his bailiffs, and when this has been done three times (the term of
ten days being allowed for each application), and the plaintiff is not found,
and does not appear either in his own proper person or by an attorney, We
decree that the judge shall then examine the papers which have been filed with
him, and if there should be no sufficient grounds upon which to act, and upon
which a positive decision can be rendered, We desire that not only the
defendant shall be released from all liability so far as the action is
concerned, but that the plaintiff shall be condemned to pay all the expenses
which are ordinarily incurred in lawsuits, and the amount of which shall be
established by the oath of the defendant; and any security which the latter may
have deposited with reference to the case, which, if it had remained would have
been released by operation of law, shall be returned to him.
If, however, from the evidence in the possession of the judge, it appears that
the plaintiff was not found, the judge can find a way by which it may become
clear to him what decision he should render; and if the plaintiff should seem
to have the better case, the judge shall not, even though he is absent,
hesitate to render a decision against the defendant who is present in favor of
the absent plaintiff, and only the costs which the defendant shall swear he has
lawfully incurred in the action shall be deducted from the judgment. Although
the plaintiff has the better case, We impose this penalty upon him solely on
account of his obstinacy in being absent, and he shall, by no means, have the
power to reopen the action, but his contumacy shall cause the loss of his case
altogether, if the defendant is discharged.
Where, however, a judgment is rendered against the defendant, in favor of the
absent plaintiff, for an amount which the latter may, perhaps, think is not
sufficient, We do not, under any circumstances, permit him to revive the case;
and this is the penalty which We inflict upon him.
(3) But if the defendant should be absent, and a similar search is conducted
for him, as We have mentioned in the case of the plaintiff, and if he also
should remain absent, and be in default; the judge, according to what is
prescribed by the ancient laws, shall thoroughly
inform himself as to the suit, by interrogating the party who is present, and
if he should be found to be liable, the judge shall not fail to render a
decision against the absent party, which must be executed and the claim of the
successful litigant be satisfied by the pecuniary resources of him who is
absent; and the judge himself can either do this on his own authority, or it
can be referred by a report to a superior magistrate, so that a lawful way may
be opened to reach the property of the contumacious party. Neither he, nor
anyone else, shall have permission to interfere when the plaintiff is placed in
possession in this way; for if the defendant himself should return, and desire
to give sureties, and recover possession, he shall not be heard, as in cases of
this kind We exclude all opposition.
(4) When either the plaintiff or the defendant is in default, the examination
of the case should proceed without any impediment, for as soon as the Holy
Scriptures are brought forward, the absence of the litigant is supplied by the
presence of God; and the judge should not apprehend any appeal from his
decision, since one who is known to be absent through obstinacy has no right to
appeal; which is the undoubted rule established by the ancient laws.
(5) A decision of this kind, however, must be rendered near the end of the said
term of three years, for which purpose We have introduced the present law. If,
however, either party already has been absent for some time, and a considerable
portion of the time remains, and he is expected to return, the decision shall
only release him from the payment of costs; and, in this instance, the
termination of the suit and the judgment rendered against the absent party only
take place where a short time remains for the expiration of the three years.
(6) If, however, the case should have been decided in the absence of one of the
parties, or in the presence of both, all the judges appointed in Our Empire are
notified that the party who is defeated shall be condemned to pay the costs of
the action to the one who gains it, but only so much as the latter may swear
that the ordinary expenses amount to; for they are aware that if they should
omit this, they themselves will be liable to this penalty, and will be
compelled to pay it to the injured party.
(7) It has seemed proper to Us to establish these rules with reference to
parties litigant, when they are absent through contumacy, for the purpose of
complying with the principles of equity.
(8) When either of the parties, desiring to proceed with the case, applies to
the judge, and the latter is unwilling to hear him, either because of his
friendship for the adverse party, or his hostility to himself, or on account of
dishonorable gain, or because of some other vice which may arise in the soul of
despicable magistrates of this kind, he himself should wish to prolong the
proceedings, and, in consequence, the term of three years should elapse, and
the judge should be appointed to the office of magistrate, or to a higher
position, or even raised to illustrious rank, he shall be compelled by the
Court of the Palace to pay ten pounds of gold into the Treasury of Our Private
Largesses.
If, however, he is a judge of inferior jurisdiction, he shall be punished with
a fine of three pounds of gold, to be collected by the same court and paid into
Our Treasury, and, having been removed from office, another judge should be
appointed in his stead, and shall, under the same circumstances, be liable to a
similar penalty.
All these things take place when one judge hears the case from the beginning;
but if, during the course of three years, judgment has been delayed, either by
the death of the judge, or by some other unavoidable accident, and one year or
more remains during which it can be decided, another judge shall be appointed
for that purpose. If, however, less than a year should remain, then all the
time lacking shall be added, in order that the newly appointed judge may not
only hear, but determine the case within the full period of a year.
(9) It should undoubtedly be observed that, if it is not the fault of the
litigant or the judge that the progress of the case has been retarded, but the
advocates are responsible for it, permission is given to the judge to fine them
two pounds of gold as a penalty, to be collected by the Court of the Palace,
and in the same manner applied to public purposes. The judge shall also state
in his decision whether the delay has been caused by the attorneys of either
the defendant or the plaintiff, and whether this has been done by all or only
by some of them; hence, those who undertook to conduct the case should continue
to do so until it has been terminated (unless the law, or some good reason
prevents them from doing so), so that delay may not result from their refusal
to proceed. Their fees should, by all means, be paid to the learned advocates
by their clients, if they can do so; and where they fail to pay them, they can
be collected by those who have charge of the affairs of the court, lest by an
artifice of this kind, cases may be delayed, unless the litigant should prefer
to select another advocate instead of the one whom he first employed.
(10) All these matters have been provided for by Us with reference to parties
of full age, whose judgment renders them capable of transacting every kind of
business.
(11) Where, however, the cases of wards or minors, or similar persons subject
to legal disability and acting under the supervision of others are concerned,
whether they are of the male or female sex, and suit has been brought by their
guardians, curators, agents, or attorneys, and through their neglect of duty
the three years have elapsed, and the right of action has been extinguished,
the proceedings, nevertheless, will retain all their force; but the injury
resulting from this neglect shall fall upon the guardians and curators, or
their sureties, and the heirs and their property, and upon all persons who have
any lawful interest in the matter. When, however, their property does not prove
sufficient to satisfy the claims of their wards or minors, it has been decided
that then they shall be entitled to the benefit of complete restitution for all
the loss which they may have sustained.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Lampadius
and Orestes, Consuls for the fifth time, 539.
12. The Same to Julian, Praetorian Prefect.
We are not introducing anything that is new or unusual, but only what has
already been established by the ancient legislators, for ever since these rules
have been treated with contempt, no small injury to litigation has resulted.
For who is ignorant of the fact that judges in former times could not accept
the judicial office unless they had previously made oath that they would on all
occasions decide according to the truth, and in compliance with the law?
Therefore, as We have found that this course has not usually been pursued, and
that the laws having reference to oaths which We previously published have
convinced litigants of the great benefit which they produced, and hence were
deservedly praised by all, We now come to this decree, which shall be valid for
all time, and by which We direct that all judges, whether of superior or
inferior jurisdiction, who have been appointed to office, either in this
Imperial City or elsewhere throughout the world subject to Our empire, as well
as those to whom We have accorded the right to hear cases, or who may be
appointed by superior judges, or who have authority to decide in their own
jurisdiction, or have been selected under an agreement, that is to say, in
accordance with a compromise (which resembles a judgment), who undertake to
dispose of lawsuits, whether they act as arbiters by virtue of a decree, or
have been chosen by the consent of the parties, and, generally speaking, all
judges learned in the Roman Law, shall not undertake to hear a case, unless the
Holy Scriptures have previously been placed in front of the judicial tribunal,
and remain there, not only during the beginning, but also throughout the entire
examination, until the very end, and the promulgation of the final decision.
If, therefore, paying attention to the Holy Scriptures, and being consecrated
by the presence of God, they dispose of litigation with the aid of a higher
power, let them know that they must not judge others in any other way than they
themselves are being judged, as this will be more terrible to them than to the
parties themselves; for while the litigants are judged by men, they themselves
introduce cases to be weighed and determined with the assistance of God.
This judicial oath shall be made known to all, and shall be added by Us to the
Roman Law, and be observed by all magistrates, and if it is neglected, those
who treat it with contempt will do so at their peril.
Extract from Novel 15, Last Section but One. Latin Text.
At present they swear that they will do what seems to them to be more just and
better, with the exception of municipal defenders, who swear that they will do
everything in conformity with the laws and justice.
THE TEXT OF THE CODE FOLLOWS.
After issue has been joined, the case of the plaintiff presented, and the
answer filed, in any action of greater or less importance,
whether brought before arbiters who have been appointed under the terms of a
compromise, or in some other way, or elected, the advocates employed on both
sides shall be sworn with their hands upon the Holy Gospels that they will
endeavor to do everything for their clients which they think to be honorable
and just, by every exertion of their knowledge and power, and that they will,
as far as possible, neglect nothing available for this purpose.
Where, however, they believe the case to be disgraceful or absolutely
desperate, or based upon false allegations, knowing this to be the fact, they
will be guilty of bad faith in taking charge of such a suit. If, however,
during the proceedings, they obtain any information to this effect, they must
withdraw from the case, and absolutely cease to have any connection with a
matter of this kind. This having been done, the abandoned litigant shall not be
permitted to seek the aid of another advocate, lest those of a better class
having repudiated him, he may have recourse to one who is unprincipled.
Where a party to a suit has employed several advocates, and all of them have
been sworn, and some, during the progress of the case, think that it should be
tried, and others refuse to proceed, the latter should retire, and those who
agree to do so should remain; for a case can be conducted to its termination
where some advocates, through timidity, withdraw, and others who are more bold,
persist in trying it; nor, under such circumstances, should permission be
granted to the litigants to substitute others instead of those who are
unwilling to continue.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Lampadius
and Orestes, 530.
13. The Same to Julian, Praetorian Prefect.
When a party who was absent at the time when he was called afterwards appears,
We order all judges, both in this Most Illustrious City and in the provinces,
not to inform him of the condition of the case, but, on the other hand, exclude
him from all knowledge of it, unless he previously makes reparation for any
loss sustained by his adversaries through his fault, as well as pays all the
expenses of conducting the case, and the fees of the advocates, or any other
costs which may have been incurred in the action. The amount of these shall be
determined by the judge after the party who incurred the expense has been
sworn, in proportion to the services rendered by the court officials; and all
Our judges and their subordinates are hereby notified that, if they neglect
anything of this kind, they will be compelled to reimburse, out of their own
property, those who have suffered any loss.
We decree that this rule shall be observed by ordinary judges when litigants,
who are required to be present (even though they have not been summoned),
absent themselves with fraudulent design.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Lampadius and
Orestes, Consuls for the fifth time, 530.
Extract from Novel 82, Chapter X. Latin Text.
After an estimate of the costs has been made and sworn to, the judge shall not
be allowed to increase it; but, at present, when he has made the estimate and
fixed the amount, he is not empowered to allow a smaller sum than has been
sworn to. If, however, he should perceive that on account of the nature of the
case, neither of the litigants ought to be subjected to any expense, he must
state this in his decision.
14. The Same to Julian, Praetorian Prefect.
It is a clear rule of law that litigants can reject judges appointed to hear a
case before it is begun, and, in accordance with the general regulations of
your tribunal, it has been established that where a judge is rejected, the
parties will be compelled to choose arbiters, and submit their claims to them.
Even when the judge was appointed by the Emperor, for the reason that We have
set our hearts upon all suits being conducted without any suspicion of
unfairness, the party who thinks that a judge is liable to suspicion can reject
him, and have recourse to another, before proceedings are instituted; as, after
issue has once been joined, We have already decided that no appeal can be taken
before final judgment, nor any judge be rejected in order to prevent
proceedings from being indefinitely prolonged; and therefore the same official
should, under the authority vested in ordinary judges and with all the
assistance of the laws, compel the parties to choose arbitrators, and appear
before them, and submit their cases just as if the arbitrators had been
appointed by the Emperor himself
We decree that this rule shall also be observed where the judge has not been
appointed by the Emperor, but by some other official.
Given at Constantinople, on the fifth of the Kalendsof May, during the
Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes, Consuls for the fifth time, 530.
Extract from Novel 86, Chapter II. Latin Text.
If, however, one of Our subjects should happen to suspect the judge, We order
that the holy archbishop, or bishop of the diocese, shall hear the case, along
with the illustrious judge, so that they both may, by amicable agreement,
remove any suspicion, either by committing the facts to writing, or by deciding
the controversy between the litigants as magistrates, and prevent the suits of
persons residing in the provinces from being protracted for a long time, while
they are absent from home. If the judge should refuse to obey the archbishop,
the latter must write to the Emperor, who will take measures to punish him.
15. The Same to John, Praetorian Prefect.
It is a positive rule of law that authority to dispose of litigation is
conceded to military men, for what is there to prevent men who are' skilled in
other matters from rendering decisions in this? We
know that the competency of military magistrates and all such persons has
already been approved, on account of their daily experience, so that they hear
and decide cases, and terminate disputes of this kind, according to the
dictates of their consciences and their knowledge of the law.
Given on the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes,
Consuls for the fifth time, 530.
16. The Same to John, Praetorian Prefect.
When a special judge has been appointed, either by the emperor or by some other
competent official, in the province in which the person who rejected another
judge resides, and either of the parties says that he suspects him; in order to
prevent the former (when he is absent and resides in another city of the same
province), from being compelled to make a long journey for the purpose of
filing his application for rejection, We direct that, if the Governor of the
province is in the city where the difficulty arises, he who alleges that he
suspects the judge shall appear before him and make the accusation in writing.
Where, however, the Governor of the province is not in the place aforesaid,
this can be done before the defender of the district, or the municipal
duumvirs, after the requisite formalities have been observed, and the judge can
be rejected. And, immediately afterwards, that is to say, within the next three
days, the parties shall be compelled, without delay, to choose an arbiter or
arbiters, and submit their cases to them, in order that the judge who has been
appointed may not be removed, and no other be chosen. Whenever a dispute arises
between the parties with reference to the selection of an arbiter, it shall, in
like manner, be decided by the Governor of the province, if he is present, or
by the defender of the district, or the municipal magistrates; and the court
official to whose care the case has been committed must carry into effect
whatever has been decided by the arbiter, unless an appeal is taken; for then
he who appointed the judge who was considered suspicious, having considered the
application for an appeal, shall render a decision in accordance with law.
Given on the Idesof November, during the Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes,
530.
TITLE II.
CONCERNING THE COSTS AND EXPENSES INCURRED IN DIFFERENT CASES, AND THE
EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF THE
COURT.
1. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Potitus, Deputy.
When anyone has been summoned to court, We order that the bailiff to whose
charge he is committed shall, in the first place, keep him under observation,
until the case has been terminated. If anyone should, under any pretext,
disobey this Our decree, after it has been
issued the official responsible for it shall be sentenced to pay a fine of five
pounds of gold.
Given at Milan, on the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Ausomius and
Olybrius, 379.
2. The Same to Julian, Praetorian Prefect.
We grant permission to all judges, with the exception of those specially
appointed by Us, who are classed as illustrious, distinguished, or eminent, and
to members of the bar of every prefecture, or any others of those who have been
delegated to hear cases by Our judges, to remove from office any of their
subordinates, if they neglect their duties, and to deprive them of the business
of which they have charge, as well as fill their places with others who are
qualified, and even to impose fines upon them.
If the judges are such as are styled illustrious, they can impose fines up to
six solidi;others, however, can not exceed one of three aurei;and the latter
should send the culprit to competent magistrates in order that they may inflict
corporeal punishment upon them. Our judges of the highest rank shall have
permission to impose even more severe penalties and corporeal punishments upon
the said subordinates when they have been guilty of embezzlement while in
office; in order that they may know that they cannot practice any deception
with reference to litigants, and that the course of justice may not be
obstructed on account of their greed of gain.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Lampadius
and Orestes, 530.
TITLE III. CONCERNING SPECIAL JUDGES.
1. The Emperor Gordian to Vicanius.
It is clear that Our Deputies, when not occupying the place of Governors of
provinces, have no authority to appoint judges to decide disputes between
private persons; and therefore, if (as you allege), he whom you mention has
thought proper to appoint arbitrators to dispose of a controversy between
private persons, any award rendered by them cannot stand under the law.
Given on the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of Atticus and
Praetextatus, 243.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to all Vicegerents.
We desire that Governors should, themselves, take cognizance of cases, which,
for the reason that they were not able to determine them, they formerly
appointed special judges to decide; but, if they cannot hear them on account of
their public duties, or because of the multiplicity of matters of this kind,
they are granted authority to appoint judges to do so. This, however, should
not be understood to mean
that permission is given them to appoint judges in cases which they are
accustomed to hear in the ordinary course of their official duties, for
jurisdiction of these must be retained by the Governors in order to prevent
their authority from appearing to be diminished. The judges, themselves, must
decide cases involving free birth, of which they formerly could take
cognizance, as well as such as have reference to manumission.
3. The Same, and the Caesars, to Serapion.
We desire that you intimate to such judges as you may see fit to appoint that,
after having rendered their decisions, they put an end to the business
entrusted to them, and that in cases in which they should, and can render
judgment, they must not assume authority to assign them to her judges; and
especially where a decision seems to one of the parties litigant to be unjust,
he shall be granted full power to interpose an appeal from the entire decision.
Given at Antioch, on the eighth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of
the Caesars, 294.
4. The Same, and the Caesars, to Firminus.
We desire that, whenever special judges have been appointed, after issue has
been joined in a case, and they have necessarily been compelled to take charge
of some other business, or to go into another province for some reason
connected with the public welfare, or have died, and on this account the
matters which have been begun cannot be terminated, other judges should be
appointed in their stead, who may dispose of the unfinished litigation; lest
otherwise some impediment may arise in the administration of justice.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof ..., during the Consulate of Tiberius and
Maximus, 295.
5. The Emperor Julian to Secundus, Praetorian Prefect.
There are certain matters which it would be superfluous to bring before the
Governor of a province, and therefore We grant authority to Governors to
appoint special judges, that is to say, such as may decide questions of minor
importance.
Given at Antioch, on the fifth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of
Mamertinus, 362.
TITLE IV.
WHAT JUDGES CAN DELEGATE THEIR JURISDICTION, AND WHO CAN BE DELEGATED.
1. The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian to Cyrus, Praetorian Prefect.
In the delegation of cases, We order that it shall, by all means, be remembered
that only such appointments are valid which come within the jurisdiction of the
judge who makes them, for if anyone
should think that he has a right to delegate a case belonging to another
jurisdiction, We decree that the person appointed need pay no attention to the
order; and if he obeys the official who appointed him contrary to law, We
direct that everything which has been done under said appointment shall be
considered void, just as if those judges who were delegated had themselves
assumed another jurisdiction, so that no necessity exists for the defeated
parties to appeal from their decisions.
These rules shall apply unless judges have been especially delegated by Us, and
have themselves assigned cases to be heard by others; for, where such persons
have been delegated, appeals can only be made from them to Us, without any
distinction of persons or cases.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of
Valentinian and Anatolius, 440.
TITLE V.
No ONE SHALL DECIDE HIS OWN CASE OR INTERPRET THE LAW FOR HIMSELF.
1. The Emperors Valens, Gratian, and Valentinian to Gracchus, Urban Prefect.
We decree by this general law that no one shall act as judge in his own case,
or interpret the law for himself, as it would be very unjust to give anyone the
right to render a decision in an affair which is his own.
Given on the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of Valens, Consul for the
sixth time, and Valentinian, Consul for the second time, 378.
TITLE VI.
WHO HAVE THE RIGHT TO APPEAR IN COURT, AND WHO HAVE NOT.
1. The Emperor Gordian to Candida.
If, at a time when you were still a minor, you appeared in court with your
adversary, without the authority of your guardian, and the Governor of the
province rendered a decision against you, it will have no judicial authority.
Given on the Idesof December, during the Consulate of Gordian and Aviola, 240.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Gemacha.
In matters relating to a private right, a ward can sue and be sued by his
guardian, and an adult can both bring and defend a suit with the consent of his
curator.
Given on the ninth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.
3. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Julian, Proconsul of Africa.
An action to obtain temporary possession can be brought by anyone, but a
petition to recover property under the pretext of obtaining possession should
not be productive of injury, especially when the action appears to have been
begun by someone not legally qualified to do so; for any business transacted
directly with a minor will be of no advantage to him, as this should be
attended to by his curator.
Given at Ravenna, on the second of the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of
Constantius and Constantine, 339.
TITLE VII.
No ONE SHALL BE COMPELLED AGAINST HIS WILL TO BRING AN ACTION, OR TO ACCUSE
ANOTHER.
1. The Emperor Diocletian to Camerius.
No one shall be forced to bring a suit, or to accuse anyone, against his will.
Given on the Idesof October, during the Consulate of Carinus, Consul for the
second time, and Numerianus, 282.
TITLE VIII. CONCERNING THE ORDER OF JUDGMENTS.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Marcellina and Others.
Go before the Governor of the province, and inform him that the will of Favius
is broken by the birth of a posthumous son. Nothing will prevent him from
taking cognizance of the case, which involves the question of status, although
he cannot usually examine matters of this kind; as this is part of the duty of
the judge having jurisdiction of estates, and of every incidental question
relating to the same, for he does not determine the condition of the person but
that of the estate.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of Geta
and Plautian, 204.
2. The Emperor Antoninus to Magnilla.
If no question is raised with reference to your condition by those whom you
allege to be your first cousins, application must be made to the Governor of
the province, in order that an action in partition may be brought. If, however,
any doubt as to your status exists, the said illustrious official shall, in the
first place, and in accordance with the formalities of the law, examine the
truth of your birth.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Antoninus,
Consul for the fourth time, and Albinus, 214.
3. The Emperors Valerian and Galliemis to Demetrius.
When a criminal question arises in the discussion of a civil one, or where a
criminal prosecution having been begun a civil suit is added to it, the judge
must dispose of both at the same time.
Given on the Nonesof ..., during the Consulate of Gallienus, Consul for the
fifth time, and Faustinus, 203.
4. The Emperor Constantine to Calphurnius.
When, during a civil investigation, as frequently happens, a criminal
accusation is first examined, as a matter of greater importance takes
precedence of ones of less; therefore, the criminal charge having been disposed
of, the civil case should be definitely decided, so that the termination of the
criminal prosecution may date from the day on which the civil action was begun,
and judgment be rendered between the parties.
Given on the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Nepotian and Facundus, 336.
TITLE IX. CONCERNING JOINDER OF ISSUE.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Valens.
A case is not considered as actually brought into court where only a simple
demand is made, or where the defendant is notified beforehand of the action to
be instituted against him; as a great difference exists between the joinder of
issue and the origin of a suit, for issue is considered to be joined only when
the judge begins to hear the cause of action discussed.
Given on the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of Severus, Consul for
the third time, and Antoninus, 201.
Extract from Novel 53, Chapter HI. Latin Text.
Notice is served upon the party who is summoned to court, and then, after the
plaintiff has deposited the costs and furnished security, the defendant will be
entitled to twenty days during which to make up his mind whether he will pay
the claim, or contest it, or whether he will reject the judge, or ask that
another be associated with him, unless the judge is one whom he himself has
already petitioned for, after having rejected the first. Then the party "who is
present is asked whether the time to plead has passed, which ought to be shown
not only by his answer, but also by the date of the summons. This is the first
thing to be done. When issue is joined without the observation of this
formality, it must be considered of no effect.
Extract from Novel 96, Chapter I. Latin Text.
The plaintiff shall not serve the notice before furnishing security to the
party whom he alleges to be liable, and to the bailiff in charge
that, if issue should not be joined within two months, he will pay the
defendant double the amount of damages which he has sustained, the sum
specified in the bond, however, should not exceed thirty-six aurei.
TITLE X. CONCERNING CLAIMS FOR MORE THAN IS DUE.
1. The Emperor Justinian to John, Praetorian Prefect.
With the intention of abolishing the odious subtleties of contracting parties,
We order that if anyone, when a certain amount is due to him, should
fraudulently and deceitfully exact security for a larger sum, and cite his
debtor to court, and then, before the case is heard, repent of his knavery, and
acknowledge the true amount of the claim, he shall not be put to increased
expense. Where, however, proceedings have been begun, and it is proved during
the trial that a false amount has been added, the plaintiff shall not only be
deprived of it, but shall also lose the entire debt; still, if a compromise or
a subsequent admission was made, whether it has been recorded or not, it shall,
in this instance, be confirmed, for such agreements must not be violated.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of
Lampadius and Orestes, 530.
TITLE XI. CONCERNING DELAYS.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, say:
As it frequently happens that a judge is through necessity compelled to grant
delay in order to insure the production of either documents or persons, it is
proper that the time demanded for their production should be granted. If the
persons or papers asked for are in the province where suit was brought, not
more than three months should be granted; if, however, they are in any of the
adjoining provinces, it is in accordance with justice for six months to be
allowed. When they are beyond sea, a delay of nine months should be given.
This having .been determined, the judges should know that under the rule they
are not permitted to grant delays arbitrarily, and they are hereby notified
that where the urgency of the case, and the necessity of obtaining the desired
information demand such a step, delay should not be granted more than once,
nor, under any pretext, be prolonged.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.
2. The Emperor Constantine to Ursus, Deputy.When anyone presents a rescript to
a specially appointed judge, a delay shall be absolutely refused him, but it
must be granted to a
person summoned to court for the purpose of proving its falsity, whether it
authorizes the production of certain documents or witnesses, as he who,
contrary to his expectations, has been brought before another judge could not
have been informed.
Given on the second of the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of Volusianus
and Annianus, 314.
Extract from Novel 53, Chapter I. Latin Text.
Recourse to another judge should not be had unless the plaintiff furnishes
security to pay a certain sum if he does not try the case, or if, having done
so, he fails to gain it. Therefore, if he should not proceed within ten days
after the time prescribed, and the defendant is present, the latter shall be
discharged, and the sum promised shall be exacted, if the defendant should
swear that he has not expended more in the case than was included in the
estimate of the judge.
3. The Same to Profuturus, Prefect of Pannonia.
Whether the delay is granted for a portion of the prescribed term, or for all
of it, the judge should remain inactive until the time requested has elapsed.
Holidays, whether they are unusual or established, are, however, not excepted
from the term of the delay, but are included in it.
Given on the seventh of the Idesof February, during the Consulate of Licinius,
Consul for the fifth time, and Crispus, 318.
4. The Same to Catullianus, Proconsul of Africa.
It is not proper to ask a judge for delay during the proceedings, even if it
should be granted while both parties are present, for this cannot be done
unless proper cause is shown, which it is preferable to ascertain by judicial
consideration of the matter, rather than through general inquiry; and if the
demand for delay should be opposed by the adverse party, the question must be
decided by the court.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof February, during the Consulate of Licinius and
Crispus, 318.
5. The Same to Maximus, Praetorian Prefect.
When a rescript has been issued by Us on an appeal, or on an application for an
opinion, whether delay was asked for at the time of the first judgment and was
not accorded, or whether it was not applied for at all, no one is permitted to
grant it, as it is not customary for Us to do so, when We take cognizance of a
case.
Given at Rome, on the eighth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of
Probrian and Julian, 322.
6. The Emperors Constantine, Constans, and Constantius to Petronius, Vicegerent
of Africa.
When proceedings are instituted between private persons and the Treasury, the
right to petition for delay, when exercised by their defenders, is not denied
either party, if good reason exists for demanding ,it.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof April, during the Consulate of Acindynus and
Proculus, 340.
7. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Messala, Praetorian Prefect.
A delay of more than nine months for the purpose of producing documentary
evidence, or obtaining the presence of persons beyond sea, should not be
granted to the parties in a suit where civil condition, or a patrimonial estate
is involved.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of Eutropius
and Theodore, 399.
TITLE XII. CONCERNING FESTIVALS.
1. The Emperors Constantius and Maximian, and the Caesars, Severus and Maximian,
to Verinus.
As you ask, my dear Verinus, whether the same rule should be observed, so far
as the times of appeal are concerned, that apply to the festivals established
by Us to celebrate the occurrence of fortunate events, We are pleased to answer
you that you should, where cases are appealed, observe the prescribed terms in
their regular order, without the addition of days of this kind, for, under such
circumstances, additions cannot be made to the observance of the days
aforesaid.
2. The Emperor Theodosius to Vicenus.
Although it is lawful to manumit and emancipate on Sunday, other business or
litigation cannot be attended to on that day. The harvest festival extends from
the eighth day of the Kalendsof July until the Kalendsof August; and permission
is given to institute proceedings in court from the Kalendsof August until the
tenth of the Kalendsof September. The festival of the vintage lasts from the
tenth of the Kalendsof September until the Idesof October. We desire the Holy
Festival of Easter, that of the Epiphany, and the birthday of Our Lord, as well
as the seven days which precede, and the seven which follow, to be quietly
observed; and anything which is done in violation of this provision shall be
absolutely void.
3. The Emperor Constantine to Elpidius.
Let all judges, the people of cities, and those employed in all trades, remain
quiet on the Holy Day of Sunday. Persons residing in the country, however, can
freely and lawfully proceed with the cultivation of the fields; as it
frequently happens that the sowing of grain or the planting of vines cannot be
deferred to a more suitable day, and by making concessions to Heaven the
advantage of the time may be lost.
Given on the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of Crispus and Constantine,
Consuls for the second time, 311.
4. The Same to Severus.
No judge shall presume to appoint festival-days by his own authority. Such
festivals as a ruler establishes shall be called Imperial holidays, and
therefore if they are deprived of the name they should also be deprived of the
benefit.
Given during the Ides of April . . .
5. The Emperors Valentinian, Valens, and Gratian to Olybrius.
You must proceed with criminal and fiscal cases during the two months of
festivals, that is to say, without any interruption.
(1) Hereafter, also, during these same days, examination shall be made of
matters in which bakers are interested.
Given on the fourth of the Nonesof May, during the Consulate of the Noble
Prince Valentinian, 368.
6. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Lucianus, Vicegerent of
Macedonia.
Every investigation of criminal matters shall be prohibited during the four
days which precede the auspicious season of the ceremonies of Easter.
Given at Thessalonica, on the sixth of the Kalendsof April, during the
Consulate of Gratian, Consul for the sixth time, and Theodosius, Consul for the
first time.
7. The Emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius to Albinus, Urban
Prefect.
We order that all days shall be proper for the administration of justice, and
that only those shall be considered holidays, which, during the two festival
months, the year seems to set apart for rest from labor; that is, the days of
summer, in order to be better able to endure the heat; and those of autumn, for
the purpose of gathering fruit.
We also devote to leisure the days of the Kalendsof January, which it is
customary to observe for this purpose, and to these We add the days of the
foundation of the great cities of Rome and Constantinople, during which the
administration of justice should be suspended, because it owes its origin to
them. We include in the same category the sacred day of Easter, and the seven
which precede and follow it; the day of the Nativity, and that of the
Epiphanies of Christ; and the time when the commemoration of the Apostolic
Passion of all Christianity is properly celebrated by the entire world.
During the above-mentioned most holy days, We do not permit any public
exhibitions to be given. The day sacred to the sun, to which the ancients very
properly gave the name of Sunday, which returns after a certain period of
revolution, must also be respected, so that there shall be no investigation of
legal disputes on that day, either before arbitrators or judges, whether they
have been appointed or voluntarily chosen.
This rule shall also apply to the days which We first saw the light, or which
witnessed the origin of the Empire. During the fifteen days
of the celebration of Easter, compulsory distribution of provisions and the
collection of all public and private obligations shall be postponed.
Given at Rome, on the second of the Idesof August, during the Consulate of
Timasius and Promotus, 389.
8. The Same to Tatian, Praetorian Prefect.
All employments, whether public or private, shall be suspended during the
fifteen days of the Festival of Easter; still, every person shall have the
right of emancipation and manumission during that time, and any proceedings
relating to them are not prohibited.
Given on the Kalendsof January, under the Consulate of Arcadius, Consul for the
second time, and Rufinus, 392.
9. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Anthemius, Praetorian Prefect.
The Governors of provinces are notified that, so far as the torture of robbers,
and especially of Isaurians is concerned, they must not think that any of the
forty days of Lent, or the venerated Festival of Easter should be excepted,
lest the betrayal of the designs of the criminals, which might be obtained by
torture, may be deferred. This should the more readily be accomplished, as,
during this time, there is greater hope of pardon by the Almighty, and the
health and safety of many persons are secured.
Given at Constantinople, on the fifth of the Kalendsof March, during the
Consulate of Bassus and Philip, 408.
10. The Emperors Leo and Anthemius to Armasius, Praetorian Prefect.
We do not wish holidays dedicated to the majesty of God to be employed in
public exhibitions, or be profaned by any annoyances resulting from
collections.
(1) Hence We decree that Sunday shall always be honored and respected, and
exempt from all executions. No notice shall be served upon anyone; no security
shall be exacted; bailiffs shall remain quiet; advocates shall cease to conduct
cases, and this day shall be free from the administration of justice; the harsh
voice of the public crier shall be silenced; litigants shall have a respite
from their disputes, and enjoy the interval of a truce; adversaries may
approach one another without fear; repentance will have an opportunity to
occupy their minds, they can enter into agreements and discuss compromises.
We do not permit persons who are at leisure during this sacred day to devote
themselves to obscene pleasures; and no one shall then demand theatrical
exhibitions, the contests of the circus, or the melancholy spectacle of wild
beasts; and when Our birthday happens to fall on Sunday, its celebration shall
be postponed. If anyone should think that upon this holiday he can venture to
interest himself in exhibitions; or the subordinate of any judge, should, under
the protest of any public or private business, violate the provisions of this
law, he
shall suffer the loss of his employment and the confiscation of his property.
Given at Constantinople, on the Idesof September, during the Consulate of Zeno
and Martian, 469.
TITLE XIII.
CONCERNING THE JURISDICTION OF ALL JUDGES AND THE COMPETENCY OF TRIBUNALS.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Severus and Others.
Our Procurator was not a competent judge in this matter where only the
litigation of private individuals was concerned, but as you yourselves chose
him, and he rendered a decision with the consent of your adversary, understand
that you should not oppose what has been done with your acquiescence, since he
has authority to decide between certain persons, and you, being well aware that
he was not a competent judge in your case, nevertheless selected him.
What you suggest with reference to other similar judges will also apply to
actions brought by a plaintiff, as well as to exceptions interposed by a
defendant.
Given on the second of the Idesof January, during the Consulate of Messala and
Sabinus, 215.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Alexander.
You ask that the order prescribed by law shall be transposed, and that the
plaintiff shall not follow the residence of the defendant, but the defendant
that of the plaintiff; for wherever the defendant has his domicile, or had it
at the time when the contract was made, there alone he must be sued, even
though he afterwards may have changed it.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof October ....
3. The Same to Judea.
The consent of private persons does not render him a judge who has no right to
preside in court, and anything that he decides will not have any judicial
authority.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof January, during the abovementioned
Consulate, 293.
4. The Emperor Constantine to All the People of the Provinces.
No one, after issue has been joined, can question the jurisdiction of an
ordinary judge, and before a decision is rendered, no appeal can be taken to
the Praetorian Prefect, the Count of the East, or any other superior magistrate,
but where an appeal has been taken in accordance with law, it shall be brought
before Our Tribunal.
Given on the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Bassus and Ablabius,
331.
5. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Vincentius, Praetorian Prefect of the
Gauls.
In criminal matters, the accuser shall follow the residence of the
defendant.
(1) Anyone who has submitted his case, whether it be a civil or criminal one,
to a tribunal which has no right to hear it, or demands a military execution,
if he is the plaintiff, shall be punished with the loss of the action which he
has brought, and if he is the defendant, he shall be considered as condemned.
Tribunes and deputies are hereby notified that they will be liable to capital
punishment, if they permit their own, or any other prohibited military
execution, to take
place.
Given at Milan, on the fifth of the Kalendsof January, during
the Consulate of Lucius, 413.
6. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Anthemius, Praetorian Prefect.
We grant authority to commanders of the army to hear and determine even civil
questions arising between military men, or a civilian plaintiff and a military
defendant, especially when this is done with the consent of the litigants, and
it appears that the military defendant cannot either be produced in court, or
punished by his own judge, if he should be guilty.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate
of Lucius, 413.
7. The Emperor Anastasius to Constantine, Praetorian Prefect.
We consider that those act unjustly and rashly who, while known to exercise
certain professions and occupations, attempt to evade the jurisdiction and
authority of officials having supervision of the said professions or
occupations. Wherefore, We order men of this kind not to reject the authority
of such persons, on account of their military rank or the prerogatives of their
office or dignity; but those who, under the law, belong to some military
organization, or have formerly done so, or who claim any privilege, shall be
compelled to obey such judges in public as well as in private cases, without
interposing any exception, where their jurisdiction extends to the profession
or occupation which the parties practice; with the exception of that of
soldiers (as has already been stated); provided, of course, they obey the
judges within whose jurisdiction the military or civil service in which they
are engaged is situated.
Those who try to violate the provisions of this law shall be deprived of their
military rank, or their civil honors, for being guilty of such an attempt.
TITLE XIV.
WHEN THE EMPEROR TAKES COGNIZANCE OF THE CASES
OF MINORS, WIDOWS, OR OTHER PERSONS WORTHY OF
PITY, THEY SHALL NOT BE COMPELLED TO APPEAR.
1. The Emperor Constantine to Andronicus.
Where anyone has obtained a Rescript from Us against minors, widows, or those
who are worn out and debilitated by chronic disease, the above-mentioned
persons shall not be compelled by any of Our judges to appear before Our
tribunal; but, on the contrary, the case shall be tried in the province in
which the litigant and the witnesses or documents are to be found, and every
precaution shall be taken to prevent the adverse parties from being forced to
leave the province. If, however, the said minors, widows, or other unfortunate
persons should request Our tribunal to decide their cases, especially when they
are in dread of the influence of some powerful individual, their adversaries
shall be obliged to appear before Us.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Optatus
and Paulinus, 334.
TITLE XV. WHERE IT IS NECESSARY TO PROCEED IN CRIMINAL CASES.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Laurina.
It is well known that proceedings in the case of crimes punishable by the laws,
or in an arbitrary manner, should be instituted in the places where the
offences were committed, or begun, or where the guilty parties may be found.
Given on the fourth of the Nonesof October, during the Consulate of Dexter and
Priscus, 194.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Nicea.
He who knowingly sells a freeman is guilty of the crime of kidnapping, and
therefore when the judge having jurisdiction has been applied to by the person
entitled to make complaint, he must take cognizance of the suit in the place
where the man lives who you say sold a boy who was freeborn.
Given on the second of the Nonesof February, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.
Extract from Novel 69, Chapter I. Latin Text.
Where anyone has committed an offence in a province, or is a defendant in a
case involving money or connected with crime, whether it has reference to
boundaries, possession, ownership, hypothecation or anything else, or is
implicated in some other matter, it is a well-established principle of law that
he shall be tried where the act was committed, and the right is not barred by
lapse of time. Therefore if both plaintiff and defendant are in the province,
the case shall be heard there without the allowance of any privilege.
If he from whom I have suffered any injury is absent, I will be obliged to sue
the person responsible for it or his curator, to whom time should be given to
permit him to inform the principal in the case. If the latter himself should
not appear, or send anyone to represent him, and he who was first sued is in
court, he shall be condemned, as well as the party who refused to send a
representative, and himself is guilty; for he will be liable out of his own
property if the one who is present should not prove to be solvent.
When, however, he whose duty it is to represent the owner does not appear after
having been summoned by the crier, he shall have judgment rendered against him,
for the reason that his contumacy is considered to take the place of his
presence. But when the plaintiff fails to appear, and the defendant comes, or
sends someone to represent him, the latter should be discharged and be
reimbursed his expenses.
An exception will lie where the case is conducted as a public one, and the
defendant has been notified by an Imperial Rescript to appear before the
Council of the Emperor; or where this is done under the law having reference to
appeals. The time of delay has been fixed by a new constitution at four months,
according to the difference in places, when the province in which the action is
brought is a neighboring one, or either or both of the parties have their
domicile in the middle of it, the time will be four months. If the distance is
greater, it will be six months. If either of the parties resides in Palestine,
or Egypt, or in some other distant country, eight months will be sufficient.
The term of nine months will be granted if either of them lives in the western
or northern regions of the Empire, or in Lybia.
TITLE XVI.
WHERE AN ACTION TO OBTAIN POSSESSION MUST BE
BROUGHT.
1. The Emperors Valentinian and Valens to Festus, Proconsul of Africa.
Where violence is alleged to have been employed, or temporary possession is
demanded, the judge must decide the case against the party who interrupted the
possession, in the place where the property
is situated.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof June, during the Consulate
of Gratian and Dagalaiphus, 366.
TITLE XVII.
WHERE THE EXECUTION OF A TRUST SHOULD BE DEMANDED.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Demetrius.There can be no doubt that
the execution of a trust should be demanded in the place where the estate was
left.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of Chilo
and Libo, 205.
TITLE XVIII.
WHERE HE WHO PROMISED TO MAKE PAYMENT IN A CERTAIN PLACE SHOULD BE SUED.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Heraclida.
When anyone binds himself to make payment in a certain place, and he does not
do so in full, if the judge was selected by the parties he can be sued in an
action in another place, and the amount of extra expense incurred by the
plaintiff as estimated by the judge shall be included in this action, on
account of payment having been made in another place than where it was
demanded.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Fuscus and
Dexter.
.TITLE XIX. WHERE AN ACTION IN REM SHOULD BE BROUGHT.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Pancratius.
An action in rem,should not be brought against the vendor, but against the
possessor of the property in dispute. Therefore, it is useless for you to
allege that he who claims the ownership should not bring suit against you, but
against him from whom you obtained it, and this is because you assert that you
are in possession, for if you should have notified the person who sold you the
property, understand that he runs the risk of eviction, for the former
jurisdiction should not be changed when both the plaintiff and possessor reside
in the same province, because you allege that he from whom you obtained the
property resides in another.
Given on the Idesof April, during the Consulate of the abovementioned Emperors,
293.
2. The Emperor Constantine to All the Inhabitants of the Provinces.
When anyone who possesses immovable property, under any title whatsoever, has
an action in rembrought against him, he must immediately state in court who the
owner of the property is, so that, whether he lives in the same town, in the
country, or in another province, a certain number of days may be fixed by the
judge during which he can be notified, and he himself either come or send an
attorney to the place where the land is situated, in order to defend the title
of the plaintiff. If, however, after the time granted has elapsed, he should
prefer to confess judgment, the case will be considered as having been begun on
the day on which the possessor was summoned
to court, which will have the effect of interrupting the prescription of long
time. As the owner of the property did not appear after he had been given time
to do so, the judge shall take care that he shall be summoned in accordance
with the provisions of the law, and if he still remains of the same mind, after
having examined the matter summarily, the judge shall not delay to place the
plaintiff in possession of the property, the right of the absent party with
reference to the principal question always being reserved.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Bassus and
Ablabius, 331.
3. The Emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius.
The plaintiff follows the residence of the defendant, whether the action be a
real or a personal one, but We order that the real action shall be brought
against the possessor in the place in which the property in dispute is
situated.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof July, under the Consulate of Arcadius and
Bauto, 385.
TITLE XX.
WHERE AN ACTION RELATING TO AN ESTATE SHOULD BE BROUGHT, AND WHERE TESTAMENTARY
HEIRS SHOULD DEMAND TO BE PLACED IN POSSESSION OF THE SAME.
1. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to Messala.
The heirs should demand to be placed in possession of the estate in the place
where you allege that it is situated. The contest should be decided where the
party sued has his domicile, or wherever the property belonging to the estate
may be.
Given on the seventh of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Secularus
and Donatus, 261.
TITLE XXI.
WHERE AN ACTION TO COMPEL THE PRODUCTION OF EITHER PUBLIC OR PRIVATE ACCOUNTS
SHOULD BE
BROUGHT.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Gerontius.
Anyone who has administered the affairs of another, either as a guardian or in
any other fiduciary capacity, must render an account of the same where he
transacted the business.
Given on the seventh of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Annibalio
and Asclepiodotus, 292.
2. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Macedonius, Military Commander.
No one who has been discharged from the army, and, after having returned to
private life, is notified to render an account by a member
of the corps in which he served or which he himself commanded, because of some
business which he attended to while in the service, can avail himself of an
exception; for everyone must defend himself before a military tribunal in all
public matters of this kind, which he had charge of while he was a soldier, or
where he is called upon to render a military account because he is alleged to
have taken advantage of his comrades; and, in an investigation of this kind,
the proceedings must be regular, and the witnesses heard, and the proper
documents produced.
TITLE XXII.
WHERE SUITS WITH REFERENCE TO THE CONDITION OF PERSONS SHOULD BE BROUGHT.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Aurelius Aristocrates.
Your female slave, while in your service, fled and betook herself to another
province, and as she asserts that she is free, it will not be unjust to compel
her to try her case in the place from whence she fled; and therefore the
Governor of the province who administers justice in that locality must take
care to send her back to the province in which she served as a slave, but she
should not be heard in the place where she was seized.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Pompeianus and Pelignus, 232.
2. The Emperor Decius to Felix.
It is known to all persons that Our Procurators cannot take cognizance of cases
in which the civil condition of persons is involved.
Given on the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of Decius, Consul for the
second time, and Gratus, 251.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Zenonia.
If you are in the possession of freedom, as the plaintiff must always follow
the residence of the defendant where questions of status are involved, this
action, which relates to liberty, must be brought in the place where the
alleged female slave resides, even though the plaintiff may be invested with
senatorial dignity.
Given on the second of the Idesof March, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors, 297.
4. The Same, and the Caesars, to Sizinia.
If anyone who is in slavery asserts that he is free, it is an undoubted rule of
law that the action to establish his status must be brought where the party who
alleges that he is his master has his domicile.
Given at Byzantium, on the second of the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of
the Caesars, 294.
5. The Same, and the Caesars, to Diogenes, Governor of the Islands.
It has already been established by Us that where any case involving freedom and
slavery arises, in the provinces, between the Treasury and private persons, it
must be sent to the Steward or Superintendent of Our Private Affairs, that is
to say, to the place where the controversy originated. If, however, free birth
is involved, it should be investigated by the Governor of the province.
Given on the fourth of the Nonesof August, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
294.
6. The Emperor Justinian to Menna, Praetorian Prefect.
We order that in actions in which the question to be decided is whether someone
is freeborn or a freedman, the prescription of five years (after which term the
ancient laws declare that an Imperial Rescript is necessary), shall hereafter
cease to have effect; and proceedings of this kind, after the above-mentioned
term has elapsed, like others which are heard in the provinces before the
Governors, shall, in this Fair City, be decided by competent magistrates of
superior
jurisdiction.
We decree that this rule shall be observed, whether the party is of illustrious
rank or servile condition.
Given on the third of the Nonesof August.


TITLE XXIII.

WHERE ANYONE BELONGING TO THE CURIae, OR THE COURT ATTENDANTS, OR OF
ANY OTHER CONDITION, CAN BE SUED.

1. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Florus, Praetorian Prefect.
If anyone belonging to the curiaeor attached to the office of a judge, or to any
other body, should be arrested in a province by those from whom he was fleeing,
without any notice having been received from the magistrate from whom he
obtained his position by means of corrupt practices, and he is tried before the
judge who has jurisdiction in the place where he was arrested, without any
attention being paid to the exception based on official privilege to which he
is not legally entitled, and he is convicted by satisfactory evidence, he shall
again be placed in the class which he abandoned.
Given at Milan, on the twelfth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of
Caesarius and Atticus.
2. The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian to Cyrus, Praetorian Prefect.
By this permanent law We decree that persons belonging to the curiae,or those
who are said to be employed for the service of the courts, or are members of
other bodies, cannot plead an exception to
the provincial tribunal. The same rule applies to those who are convicted of
extortion or peculation, excepting such as form part of the armed soldiery, or
can defend themselves by a special Rescript of the Emperor.
The name of their curiaeor cohort should be required of military men, in order
that the Governor of the province may send them to your tribunal, to their
commander, or to some other competent authority, and that those who are
demanded as liable may be delivered up to the tribunals of the province, and
may expect the result of the trial where the laws direct questions of this kind
to be determined.
No one shall be permitted to plead the exception where questions of public
duties or debts are involved, except those specially empowered to do so.
We also decree that others cannot reject the jurisdiction of your illustrious
tribunal, or that of the Governors of the provinces, in any matter whatsoever,
so that all who obstinately attempt to violate such a very salutary law as this
may know that sentence for contumacy can be passed upon them by the Governors
of provinces.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Cyrus,
441.
TITLE XXIV.
WHERE SENATORS OR PERSONS OF ILLUSTRIOUS RANK MAY BE PROCEEDED AGAINST EITHER
CIVILLY OR CRIMINALLY.
1. The Emperor Constantine to Octavianus, Count of the Spains.
Anyone whosoever, that is not of illustrious but of noble rank, who ravishes a
virgin, removes landmarks, or is caught in the act of committing any offence,
or crime, shall be tried in the province in which he perpetrated it, and cannot
avail himself of the jurisdictional exception, for the commission of the
offence destroys the effect of all privileges of this kind.
Given on the day before the Nonesof December, during the Consulate of
Gallicanus and Bassus.
2. The Emperors Valens, Gratian, and Valentinian to the Senate.
In pecuniary cases, senators, whether they reside in this Fair City or in its
suburbs, shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Praetorian Tribunals and
the Urban Prefecture, as well as to that of the Master of the Offices, whenever
We have directed this to be done. If, however, they reside in the provinces,
they shall answer wherever their domicile is, or where the greater part of
their property is situated and they pass the most of their time.
Given on the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Valentinian and
Nepterius, 390.
3. The Emperor Zeno to Arcadiiis, Praetorian Prefect.
If persons who are now, or have formerly been of patrician rank, or who have
administered the Praetorian or Urban Prefectures of this great City, men of
consular dignity, whether they have obtained it in an ordinary manner or by the
special favor of the Emperor, those who have become illustrious through the
exertion of military command, those who have performed the duties of Master of
the Offices, Quaestor, or Imperial Chamberlain, and, having retired, have been
invested with senatorial rank, those whom We have appointed to govern the
Imperial Household, and those to whom We have committed the care of Our
treasures, or of the private affairs of Our most August Consort, after having
relinquished their administration, should be accused of any public or private
offence (which cannot be defended by an attorney), either in this Fair City or
in the provinces, no matter where they may reside, We order that no judge shall
have jurisdiction of such cases, but that cognizance of the same shall belong
to Us alone, or to him to whom by an Imperial Rescript We have delegated Our
authority to hear actions of this kind; so that they may be tried before such a
judge, without the aid of any office or order, according to the custom and
practice of the Imperial regulations, and moreover, without observing the time
allowed for the institution of proceedings; and Our Masters of Requests, having
complied with the ordinary formalities, such cases shall be heard by them. In
order that the person accused of crime may not suffer any injustice before
conviction, he shall have the right to be seated in a certain part of the
court, which is lower than that occupied by the judge, but higher than that
where his accusers are stationed.
(1) We have considered that the privileges attaching to such great offices
should be increased to the extent that, after the crime has once been proved,
We do not grant authority to anyone whom We have appointed as judge to decide
with reference to either person or property, but these appointees, although
they hear the cases instead of the Emperor, shall only be permitted to send Us
a report of the proceedings after the crime which has been brought before their
tribunal has been established, as the right to punish persons of such exalted
rank is only vested in the Emperor.
It is, however, certain that in case the defendant should be acquitted, the
false accusation can be punished in conformity with the laws, without
consulting Us, unless the accuser is of a lower rank than the defendant; for,
in this instance, it is not unreasonable that the Imperial authority should be
consulted as to the punishment of a false charge made by an accuser of this
description.
(2) We also decree that where men of illustrious rank, who reside in this
Renowned City, and who, without having conducted any administration, have been
decorated with honorable titles (even though they may have deserved such a
privilege at Our hands), shall, nevertheless, be considered to have exercised
administrative functions, and shall be subject to the jurisdiction of your
magnificent tribunal, and
to that of the illustrious Urban Prefecture; and also to that of our
distinguished Master of the Offices (whenever a special order committing the
same to him has been issued by Us), in criminal cases, so that persons of this
kind, who have been accused, cannot claim for themselves the right to be seated
during their trials. The judges themselves are hereby notified that they cannot
decide anything with reference to said parties or their property, after the
crimes have been proved, and before they have referred the cases to Us.
(3) Whenever men of illustrious rank residing in the provinces (this, however,
does not apply to those who are not appointed by Us, or hear cases in Our
stead), are accused of criminal offences, they shall have a right, while the
trial is in progress, to sit in the places usually occupied by magistrates, and
if their guilt should be established, the judges must abstain from passing
sentence involving their persons or property, as they are required to report to
Us.
Moreover, where the accusers have been proved to have brought false charges,
the provincial judges shall not delay their punishment; unless, as has
previously been stated, those who were convicted are equal in rank to him whom
they accused.
Given at Constantinople, . . .
TITLE XXV.
IN WHAT CASES SOLDIERS CANNOT AVAIL THEMSELVES OF AN EXCEPTION ON THE GROUND OF
JURISDICTION.
1. The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian to Florentine, Praetorian Prefect.
We order that all persons attached to the domestic service of the Emperor, as
well as those who transact his affairs, and any who profess to belong to some
corps, or to be of a certain rank, shall, so far as public duties are
concerned, be responsible to the Governors of the provinces, and shall have no
right to avail themselves of the exception on the ground of jurisdiction, if
those who are collecting the public debts should attempt to do so. Moreover, We
desire that where men occupied in the transaction of private business, who are
either members of the provincial association, or are protected by their
occupation as farmers of the revenue, but are not enrolled in the army, have
rented land belonging to the Emperor, or to powerful persons, or to anyone
else, no matter what his status may be, shall be subjected to the jurisdiction
of the same judges, unless they can prove that they have obtained leave of
absence for a year for the purpose of attending to their own affairs.
The same rule shall also be observed with reference to those who have obtained
the privilege of trading as soldiers; namely, that they shall only be
responsible to the Governor of provinces.
Given at Constantinople, on the third of the Kalendsof ..., during the
Consulate of Theodosius, Consul for the seventeenth time, and Festus, 439.
TITLE XXVI.
WHERE CASES RELATING TO THE PUBLIC TREASURY OR
THE IMPERIAL PALACE, OR TO PERSONS ATTACHED TO THE
SAME, SHALL BE BROUGHT.
1. The Emperors Severns and Antoninus to Dioscorus.
Who is ignorant of the fact that the question of avenging the death of a
deceased person should not be investigated by Our Procurators, nor any property
claimed by the Treasury, before proof of the crime has been established in the
presence of the judge who has a right to impose punishment upon the parties,
when convicted? When persons guilty of the homicide are dead, it is clear that
reason will permit the action to be brought before the said Procurators.
Given on the seventh of the Idesof May, during the Consulate of Lateranus and
Rufinus, 198.
2. The Same to Arista.
We do not understand why you desire cases belonging to the jurisdiction of Our
Procurators to be sent to be heard by the Proconsul; for if it is suspected
that your father killed himself through fear of punishment, and, for this
reason, his property should be confiscated to the Treasury, in this instance,
there is no question of crime or the punishment of the deceased, but merely one
involving his estate.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Aper and
Maximus, 208.
3. The Emperor Antoninus to Heliodorus.
As My Procurator, who does not perform the functions of the Governor of a
province, cannot exact the penalty for abandoning an accusation; so, he cannot,
by his decision, order it to be paid.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of Laetus
and Cerealis, 216.
4. The Emperor Alexander to Maxima.
As you allege that you have purchased certain lands belonging to an estate from
My Procurator, you must necessarily pay the price of the same, but as you say
that you have purchased and delivered the said lands to the persons who
directed you to do so, and you bring suit against them, My Procurator shall
decide the case if you select him for that purpose, so that you can recover the
purchase-money due to you, and the interest owing to the Treasury may be paid.
Given on the fourth of the Idesof October, during the Consulate of Maximus and
Paternus, 224.
5. The Emperor Constantine to Ursus.
The Imperial Accountant shall decide all cases having reference to the
Treasury, and all extortion is prohibited.
Given at Constantinople, on the Nonesof February, during the Consulate of
Felicianus and Titian, 337.
6. The Same to Italicus.
When anyone thinks that an action should be brought against a tenant who has
leased Our property, the case should be referred to the illustrious Count of
Private Affairs, who must render a decision in accordance with his reputation
as a magistrate, and with his duty.
Given during the Kalendsof February, . . .
7. The Same to Bulephorus, Imperial Accountant.
We decree that you shall investigate any controversies arising between the
tenants of the Emperor and those of private persons, for generals and other
commanders of soldiers and camps, as well as Governors of provinces, must
abstain from summoning and bringing tenants into court.
Given on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of
Licinius, 318.
8. The Emperor Constantine to Taurus, Praetorian Prefect.
When a tenant, or a slave belonging to Our private estate, is said to have
perpetrated an act against the public order, he shall be compelled to appear
before the tribunal of the Governor of the province, so that the case between
him and his accuser may be tried in the presence of Our Accountant or the
Steward of the Imperial Household, and if the crime is proved he shall be
punished with the severity prescribed by the law.
Given on the fifth of the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of Arbitio and
Lollianus, 355.
9. The Emperors Valentinian and Valens to Philip.
Let all persons be assured that, if anyone should be annoyed by some injury
caused by the Steward of Our Private Affairs, or by Our Procurator, complaint
of their insults or depredations shall be brought before your tribunal, or that
of the Governor of the province, and he can, without fear, have recourse to
public vengeance.
When the offence is established by positive evidence, We order and decree that
he who has had the audacity to attempt anything of this kind against anyone
residing in the province shall be publicly burned alive.
Given on the third of the Nonesof July, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors, 368.
10. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Polemius, Praetorian
Prefect.
No one of those employed in the office of the Imperial Accountant, either for
the collection of taxes or the drawing up of documents, shall be brought before
any other tribunal, unless an accusation formulated in accordance with law is
filed against him.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Arcadius and
Bauto, 385.
11. The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian to Artaxus, Imperial Chamberlain.
We order by this law that if any tenant, lessee, or slave belonging to Us,
either accuses, or is accused in a criminal case, or is a party to a civil
suit, the trial of the same shall not take place before any tribunal but yours,
and that of the distinguished Count of Our Household, and that no exception on
the ground of want of jurisdiction shall be permitted.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof April, ...


TITLE XXVII.
WHEN ANYONE MAY BE PERMITTED TO AVENGE HIMSELF OR THE PUBLIC, WITHOUT APPLYING
TO THE JUDGE.

1. The Emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius to the People of the
Provinces.
We grant to all persons full authority to defend themselves, so that where any
soldier or nocturnal depredator enters upon the land of aprivate person, or
stops him on the public highway, intending to attack him, everyone shall have
permission to immediately subject him to proper punishment, and he shall suffer
the death which he threatened, and undergo what he expected to inflict, for it
is better to take advantage of the opportunity than to obtain retribution after
death. Therefore, We authorize you to avenge yourselves, and We bring within
the terms of the Edict those whom it would be too late to punish by a judgment;
hence let no one spare a soldier, who must be encountered with weapons in the
same manner as a thief.
Given on the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Tatian and Symmachus, 391.

2. The Emperors Arcadius, Honorius, and Theodosius to Hadrian, Praetorian
Prefect.
We hereby grant legal authority to the inhabitants of provinces to arrest
deserters, and when they dare to resist, We order them to be punished
immediately, wherever they may be. All persons are notified that, for the sake
of the common peace, they have a right to inflict public vengeance upon
robbers, and deserters from the army.
Given on the fifth of the Nonesof October, during the Consulate of Theodosius
and Rumoridius, 391.


TITLE XXVIII. CONCERNING INOFFICIOUS WILLS.

1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Victorinus.
When a son desires to attack the will of his mother, on the ground of its being
inofficious, it will not be improper for him to bring suit
against the person who has received the estate under the terms of a trust, as
the beneficiary of the same is fully as liable as if he held it as heir, or
possessor.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Falco and
Clarus, 194.

2. The Same to Lucretius.
Although you state that, being about to attack the will as inofficious, you
have obtained possession of the estate, it is, nevertheless, unjust that the
appointed heirs should be deprived of possession.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of Dexter
and Priscus, 197.

3. The Same to Januarius.
Where a mother, after having appointed her two sons her heirs, had another son
after making her will, as she could have changed it, but neglected to do so,
the third son, having been passed over without good reason, can institute
proceedings to declare the will inofficious. But as you allege that the woman
died in child-birth, the injustice of the unexpected event should be rectified
by the conjecture of maternal affection. Wherefore We hold that an equal share
of the estate should be given to your son, against whose claim nothing can be
alleged except the fate of his mother, just as if she had appointed all of her
sons her heirs. Where, however, the appointed heirs are strangers, then he will
not be prevented from bringing suit to declare the will inofficious.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Lateranus
and Rufinus, 198.

4. The Same to Soterius and Others.
As you have obtained your freedom under the terms of a trust, and in accordance
with a decree of the Praetor, and as you have afterwards had children; although
the will of your master may, upon the application of your son, have been
pronounced inofficious, it is not just for any question to be raised with
reference to your freedom.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof March, under the second Consulate of Antoninus
and Geta, 106.

5. The Emperor Antoninus to Helius.
If your father, after having brought an action, or after having made up his
mind to attack the will of your brother as inofficious, should die, leaving you
his heir, you will not be prevented from proceeding with the case, which he had
begun, in any way whatsoever.
Given on the second of the Nonesof October, during the Consulate of Gentian and
Bassus, 212.

6. The Same to Ingenuus.
When the question is asked whether sons can attack the will of their father as
inofficious, it should be ascertained whether, at the time of his death, the
testator left them the fourth part of his estate.
Given at Rome, on the seventh of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of
the two Aspers, 213.
Extract from Novel 18, Chapter I. Latin Text.
It is provided by the latest law that, where there are four sons or less, they
can take the third part of the estate of the deceased, but if there are more
than this, they will have a right to half of what is left no matter under what
title, and this share shall be equally divided among them; and that the
children cannot in any way be defrauded of the usufruct by their ascendants.
Extract from Novel 92, Chapter I. Latin Text.
Therefore, if a parent has made an unreasonable donation to one or several of
his or her children, each one will be entitled under the Falcidian Law to as
much of the estate as would have been due to him before the donation was made.
It is, moreover, permitted to him who received it to abstain from laying any
claim to the estate, provided he makes up the shares of the others out of the
donation, if any necessity exists for doing so.

7. The Same to Secundus.
You should not be ignorant that the granddaughter of the deceased can institute
proceedings to declare his will inofficious, even though her father may have
died emancipated.
Given at Rome, on the sixth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of
Laetus and Cerealis, 216.

8. The Emperor Alexander to Florentinus.
The distribution of their estates made by parents between their children should
not be set aside, provided those who know that they were entitled to succeed to
the deceased, if he died intestate, have obtained their fourth by the will of
their father.
(1) He who has accepted the will of the deceased, either through having paid
the indebtedness of his father in proportion to his hereditary share, or by
settling it in any other legal manner, cannot, if he is over twenty-five years
of age, attack as inofficious his father's will, which he accepted, even if
less was bequeathed to him than he was entitled to.
Given on the seventh of the Idesof February, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and aelianus, 224.

9. The Same to Romana.
. It is a positive rule of law that children cannot attack as inofficious the
will of a soldier, a centurion, or a tribune, whether it was made in accordance
with military or civil law.
Given on the Idesof May, during the Consulate of Maximus, Consul for the second
time, and aelianus, 224.
10. The Same to Quintinian.
If the property of the heirs of Quintinian (who you say was your father, and
against whose representatives you are about to bring an
action to declare the will inofficious), belonged to the Treasury by the right
of succession, or it holds the property of Quintinian, as being without an
owner, you can bring your action before Our Procurator.
11. The Same to Ingenuus.
Anyone who has not been sentenced to fight in the arena, but has voluntarily
selected that profession, can succeed to an estate as heir at law, as his
rights as a citizen and a freeman remain intact. If, however, his father made a
will, the son cannot call it in question as being inofficious, nor shall he be
entitled to possession of the estate, for the father very properly decided that
his son was unworthy to succeed him, unless he himself was of the same
condition.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of Julian,
and Crispinus, 225.
12. The Same to Licinianus and Diogenes.
If the father of the girl whose curator you allege that you are, after having
appointed heirs, that is to say, his son to half his estate, his daughter to a
third, and his wife to the remaining sixth, charged his children that, if
either of them should die before reaching the age of twenty-five years, his or
her share should go to the survivors, and also charged his wife to give to his
children any part of the estate which might come into her hands, you should
not, against the just wish of the testator, bring the action of calumny to
declare the will inofficious, as by a restitution of this kind under the trust,
the share of the mother, as well as that of the brother, will come into the
hands of your ward.
Given on the Nonesof December, during the Consulate of Alexander, Consul for
the third time, and Dio, 236.
13. The Emperor Gordian to Prisciamts.
Two heirs having been appointed, one to five and the other to seven-twelfths of
an estate, you allege that you brought a proper action against the one who was
appointed heir to seven-twelfths, but that you were defeated by the other, and
consequently the will is broken, so far as that portion of it is concerned, as
he who is entitled to the estate ab intestatowill succeed, and neither the
legacies nor the trusts will be due, although the grants of freedom will take
effect directly, and the trusts should be executed.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulship of Gordian
and Aviola, 240.
14. The Same to Priscus.
Where a party litigant has been unable to prove the complaint of
inofficiousness brought against a will, it has been decided that he is not
barred from declaring it to be forged.
The same rule should be observed where, on the other hand, someone has attacked
a will as having been forged, and afterwards desires to bring suit to declare
it inofficious.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of Gordian
and Aviola, 240.
15. The Emperor Philip to Aphrodisia.
It is a settled principle of law that a daughter who has been passed over by
her mother cannot aspire to the succession of the latter without having
previously instituted proceedings to declare the will inofficious.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Philip and
Titian, 246.
16. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus, and the Caesar Valerian, to Theodora.
Where persons over the age of twenty-five years bring two actions attacking a
will, one for the reason that it was not drawn up according to law, the other
that it was inofficious, although it may have legally been executed, the
prescription of five years, dating from the time of the first judgment, does
not run as long as one of the actions remains to be tried.
Given on the Idesof August, under the Consulate of Tuscus and Bassus, 259.
17. The Emperors Carinus and Numerianus to Flora.
When you state that your son, having passed you over, appointed his sister his
heir, you can bring suit before the Governor of the province to declare the
will inofficious.
Given on the second of the Idesof February, during the Consulate of Carinus,
Consul for the second time, and Numerian, 284.
18. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Faustina.
As you say that you have not violated your filial affection, but were unwilling
to separate from your husband whom you had married, and because your father was
angry and irritated on account of this, he disinherited you, you will not be
prevented from filing a complaint against the will as being inofficious.
Given on the Kalendsof May, under the Consulate of Maximus, Consul for the
second time, and Aquilinus, 285.
19. The Same to Apollonarius.
If you think that your daughter should be excluded from your estate because she
lives a dishonorable and shameful life, and if you have not been influenced by
sudden anger to take this course, but your hatred is founded upon reason, you
will be free to make your last will in accordance with your wishes.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors, 293.
Extract from Novel 115, Chapter III. Latin Text.Where, however, you postponed
the marriage of your daughter after she had reached the age of twenty-five
years, and she then com-
mitted sin with her body; or if, without your consent, she married a husband
who is free, you cannot disinherit her.
20. The Same, and the Caesars, to Savianus.
Where a daughter, after her father's death, married with the consent of her
mother, and, living on good terms with her husband, did not offer any reason
for complaint, after her mother had repented of having consented, she cannot be
compelled by law, whether still married, or a widow, to be subject to the
momentary caprices of her mother.
Given on the Nonesof January, during the Consulate of the Caesars, 294.
21. The Same, and the Caesars, to Alexander.
Nephews or nieces, or paternal and maternal uncles or aunts will, in vain,
attack a will as inofficious, as no relative in the collateral line, with the
exception of a brother or sister, is permitted to do so; but they are not
prevented from bringing a criminal accusation alleging that the will is forged.
Given during the Consulate of the Caesars, 294.
22. The Same, and the Caesars, to Tantilla.
If your husband, by his will, appointed you heir to his entire estate, and
disinherited a daughter who was under his control, such a disinheritance will
not be permitted by law, where nothing has been left to her, and she did not
give him any just cause for offence; for there is no doubt that if she should
attack the will as inofficious, she can obtain the entire estate.
Where, however, she has already obtained it, or afterwards brings suit to
recover it, she must surrender to you whatever her husband owed you at the time
of his death.
Given on the Idesof February, during the Consulate of the Caesars, 294.
23. The Same, and the Caesars, to Philip and Others.
As you acknowledge that you prevented your mother from making a will in the
presence of witnesses, you have evidently given just cause for offence.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof September, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
294.
24. The Same, and the Caesars, to Successus.
The will of a soldier, who is a son under paternal control, disposing of his
castrense peculium,cannot be set aside, either by his father or his children,
on the ground of its being inofficious.
Given at Nicomedia, on the third of the Nonesof December, during the Consulate
of the Caesars, 294.
25. The Same, and the Caesars, to Menedotus.It has been established by law that
a mother, who was suspicious of the morals of her husband, could consult the
interests of her chil-
dren by appointing them heirs, under the condition that they were emancipated
by their father; and that if, after this agreement was made, the father did not
comply with the condition, he could not obtain possession of the property in
accordance with the terms of the will, nor could he bring suit in the name of
his children to set aside the will on the ground of inofficiousness, as the
mother had not injured them in any way, but had rather intended to provide for
them; and therefore he should deliver the estate to them.
26. The Same, and the Caesars, to Serapion.
When a son has been appointed heir to three-twelfths of an estate, it is
certain that a direct substitution can legally be made for him by his father,
if he should die before the age of puberty.
Given at Nicomedia, on the fifth of the Kalendsof September, during the
Consulate of the Caesars, 302.
27. The Emperor Constantine to Verinus.
Uterine brothers and sisters are absolutely prohibited from bringing an action
for the purpose of proving the will of a brother or sister to be inofficious.
Blood-relatives, however, whether agnation exists or not, can institute
proceedings on the ground of inofficiousness of the will of a brother or
sister, where the appointed heirs are, even to a slight extent, branded with
infamy or dishonor, or where freedmen have obtained this great favor from their
patrons, being at the same time wholly undeserving of it, except where a slave
has been appointed a necessary heir.
28. The Same to Claudius, Governor of the Province of Dacia.
Children who institute proceedings to declare the wills of their parents
inofficious must show that they have constantly manifested toward them all the
respect which natural affection demands, unless the appointed heirs are able to
prove that the children have been ungrateful to them. Where a mother attacks
the will of her son as inofficious, We order diligent inquiry to be made
whether the latter had any just cause for complaint against his mother, since
he could thus exclude her from the benefit of his last will, as he did not even
leave her his funeral expenses, or the amount to which she legally was
entitled, so that, the will having been set aside, she may obtain the
succession of the estate by law. If, however, she had annoyed her son by
dishonorable acts and indecent machinations, and either openly or secretly had
laid snares for him, or been on terms of friendship with his enemies, and had
so conducted herself with others that she rather appeared to be his enemy than
his mother, and these facts are established, she will be compelled to accept
the will of her son, even against her consent.
Given on the third of the Idesof February, during the Consulate of Crispus and
Constantius-Caesar, Consuls for the second time, 321.
29. The Emperor Zeno to Sebastian, Praetorian Prefect.
As the new constitution of the Divine Leo directs that an antenuptial donation
shall be given to a son, just as a dowry is given to a daughter, We order that
such donations shall be charged to the fourth part to which the son is legally
entitled.
In the same way, when a father or mother gives a dowry for his or her daughter,
or an ante-nuptial donation for their son, or a paternal grandfather or
grandmother gives one for his or her granddaughter or grandson, or a paternal
or maternal great-grandfather or great-grandmother gives one for his or her
great-granddaughter or great-grandson, this dowry or donation shall not be
bestowed upon the parties, but shall be deducted to the fourth part to which
each is legally entitled, if it has been taken from the property belonging to
the estate which is in dispute; and We desire this to be charged in this manner
for the purpose of preventing the will from being attacked as inofficious.
Given on the Kalendsof May, during the second Consulate of the same Emperor,
321.
30. The Emperor Justinian to Menna.
With the intention of treating the wills of testators with every consideration,
We think, nevertheless, that the innumerable pretexts for setting them aside
should be disposed of, in certain cases in which it was formerly customary for
proceedings to be instituted for the purpose of declaring the wills of deceased
persons inofficious, or of annulling them in some other way; but, by this
certain and established law, provision is made for the interests of testators
and their children, as well as for those of other parties who have a right to
bring this same action; so that whether it is or is not stated in the will that
the legitimate portion shall be paid, the will shall be valid; and it shall,
moreover, be lawful for those persons who have the right to attack it as being
inofficious or to set it aside in some other way, to exact what is lacking to
them to make up their legitimate shares, without their being subjected to any
burden or delay; provided that they have not legally been denounced as
ungrateful, that is to say, if the testator did, not declare that they had
manifested ingratitude towards him.
If, however, he did not allude to them as being ungrateful, his heirs shall not
be permitted to accuse them as such, and to introduce a question of this kind.
We establish these rules with reference to persons whom testators have not
mentioned as being ungrateful, and to whom they have left a certain amount of
their estates, either as legacies or trusts, even though the amount may be less
than what they are entitled to by law.
(1) Where, however, they have passed over any such person who was already born,
or who was conceived before the will was made but was still unborn, or to whom
absolutely nothing was left on account of his being disinherited, or having
been otherwise unfavorably mentioned, then We order that the ancient laws shall
apply, and that no innovation or change shall be caused by the present
enactment.
(2) It is clear that whatever property has been obtained as profit from the
estate of the deceased through an employment in the army should be deducted
from the legitimate shares of the children and other persons who formerly had a
right to institute proceedings to declare a will inofficious, and We wish this
to be the case, and that, where a right of this kind can be sold, or if the
soldier should die while in the service, the value of the same shall descend to
his heirs. Therefore, in order that the value of the right which a soldier may
obtain by the death of the testator may be ascertained, and as much may be
charged to his legitimate share as is decided should be given, if he who
acquired the property of the testator had died while holding his rank in the
army, those officials of our Sacred Palace who are designated silentarii1being
alone excepted, to whom are granted special privileges, not only with reference
to other matters, but also concerning money given by their parents for the
purpose of obtaining the above-mentioned military employment; among which
privileges we direct shall be included that such a donation shall not be
deducted from their lawful shares of an estate.

We desire that the preceding regulations shall apply to all other
persons.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof June, under the Consulate of
Justinian, Consul for the second time, 528.
31. The Same to Menna, Praetorian Prefect.
We order that the provisions which We have recently made for the purpose of
protecting wills shall not be readily abrogated, under the pretext that less
than the amount fixed by the Falcidian Law has been left to persons who, in
accordance with former laws, had a right to institute proceedings to declare a
will inofficious; and that wills shall not be placed in danger, but whatever is
lacking to a legitimate share, that is to say, to the fourth part of an
intestate succession, shall only be contributed, those persons being excepted
to whom nothing was left by will, with reference to whom the rights conferred
by former laws shall remain unimpaired.
We order that these regulations shall also apply to wills which are not in
writing.
Given on the second of the Idesof December, during the Consulate of Our Lord
Justinian, Consul for the second time, 328.
32. The Same to Menna, Praetorian Prefect.
As We have established by former enactments that, if less than their legal
shares are left to persons who could, under the ancient laws, bring suit to
declare a will inofficious, it shall be made up to them, in order that the will
may not be set aside on the ground that a smaller sum has been left them than
they were entitled to, We think it should be added to the present law that, if
the rights of those who formerly
1 The silentariiwere a body of attendants attached to the imperial palace,
whose duty it was, as their name indicates, to maintain silence in its
precincts, and discourage all loud talking or noisy demonstrations. They were
under the command of decurions. --- ED.
could bring the above-mentioned action appear to have been impaired by any
conditions, delays, or dispositions which may cause any delay, diminution, or
burden, the said conditions, delays, or dispositions causing such diminution or
burden should be abolished, and that the matter should proceed just as if none
of these things had been inserted into the will.
Given on the second of the Kalendsof April, during the fifth Consulate of
Decius, 529.
33. The Same to Demosthenes, Praetorian Prefect.
Where anyone, by his will, leaves the greater portion of his estate to one of
his children, and the small residue to another, or to others, in order that
there may be no ground for an action to declare the will inofficious, and that
what is left to the heirs either by way of inheritance, or as a legacy or
trust, may take the part of the share to which they are entitled by law, if he
who obtains the smaller portion is willing to accept it, and the one who has
been left the larger one (whether there be one alone, or several), refuses to
deliver what the others are entitled to, without contention or delay, but
compels them to go into court, and causes many and various disputes to arise
with reference to the same, and, after a long lapse of time, reluctantly
surrenders the property in compliance with the judgment, We intend that such
cruelty shall be punished by a suitable penalty; hence, where a case of this
kind occurs, the offender shall not only be condemned to relinquish what the
testator wished him to give up, but also the third part of an equal amount
which was left by will, which he shall be compelled to surrender under all
circumstances, in order that his avarice may be punished by the power of the
law; and all other matters which have been included in the same will, whether
it be written or not, shall be carried into effect as therein provided.
(1) We have addressed Ourselves to the promulgation of this law for the purpose
of remedying the injustice of former legislation, and that the former
objectionable rule, which Julius Paulus mentions in his Book of Questions, may
no longer be a source of reproach. For he stated that a child could not be
accused by its mother of being ungrateful, and could not, for this reason, be
excluded from her estate, unless she did so through dislike to her husband, by
whom the said child was begotten; and We considering it to be unjust that
anyone should suffer from hatred entertained toward another, order that this
rule shall be abolished; and We do not permit any reason of this kind to be
advanced either against children of tender age, or against others of any age
whatever, as a mother can leave her estate to her son under the condition of
his being emancipated, and, in this way, gratify her aversion to his father,
and not injure the rights of her child, or show herself lacking in natural
affection, for it seems to Us to be cruel for anyone to be considered
ungrateful who has not yet the power to form an opinion.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalends ofOctober, during the Consulate of Decius,
Consul for the fifth time, 529.
34. The Same to John, Praetorian Prefect.
Where anyone disinherits his son, and appoints a foreign heir, but leaves a
grandson by the son aforesaid, who is either already living or as yet unborn,
and while the appointed heir is deliberating whether to accept the estate, the
disinherited son should die without having made, or prepared to make a claim
for the estate on the ground that the will is inofficious, he deprives the
grandson of all opportunity for relief, as the father of the latter, at the
time of his death, did not leave him any recourse against the will of his
father, because after the estate was entered upon by the foreign heir, his
father survived his grandfather, and the grandson could not, under the terms of
the Velleian Law, succeed his father and thereby rescind the will; and some
jurists, in discussing this point, have sustained this inhuman opinion.
We, however, who think We entertain paternal affection and feeling for all Our
subjects, and Our children and grandchildren, and, as far as possible, having a
view to the advantage of all, do hereby order that, in cases of this kind,
every right shall be conferred upon a grandson to which the son was entitled;
and although no preparation may have been made for bringing an action to
declare the will inofficious, a grandson can, nevertheless, bring this action,
and if the heir does not prove by perfectly conclusive evidence that the father
of the grandson was ungrateful towards the testator, the will having been set
aside, the grandson shall be called to the succession as intestate, unless a
certain amount was left to his father which was less than the share to which he
was entitled; for then, in accordance with the New Constitution which We have
promulgated, the grandson can have the deficiency of the fourth part made up to
him, if his father had not already received it, so that he may enjoy the
benefit that We confer, a privilege which indeed, neglected in ancient times,
has been established by Our authority, unless the father, during his lifetime,
either rejected his right to bring suit to declare the will inofficious, or
remained silent for five years from the day when the estate was entered upon.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Lampadius
and Orestes, 530.
. 35. The Same to Julian, Praetorian Prefect.Whenever the permission of the
Emperor is given to anyone freely to make a will, he is considered to have
granted nothing more than that the party in question may enjoy the legal and
ordinary testamentary right; for it must not be believed that the Roman
Emperor, who maintains the laws, would, by a concession of this kind, intend to
overthrow all the regulations relating to wills which have been devised and
framed with so much care.
(1) We also decree that, if anyone should receive a certain sum of money, or a
certain amount of property from his father, and agrees that he will, under no
circumstances, bring suit to declare his will inofficious, and, after the death
of his father, the son, having examined
his will, should be unwilling to accept it, and should think that it ought to
be contested, an opinion was given by Papinianus in which he stated that a son
ought, by no means, to be oppressed by an agreement of this kind, but that
children should rather be induced to show respect to their parents than be
restrained by contracts.
We adopt this opinion, unless the son should have made a compromise with the
heirs of his father in which he clearly accepted the will of the latter.
(2) And, generally speaking, We say that when a father leaves his son a smaller
share of his estate than that to which he is legally entitled, or gives him
something either by a donation mortis causaor by one inter vivos,under the
condition that the donation inter vivosshall be deducted from his lawful
fourth, and the son, after the death of his father, simply acknowledged what
was left or donated to him, or executed a release to the heirs for the same,
but did not add that he would not raise any question with reference to what he
was entitled to make up his lawful share, he does not prejudice his rights in
any way, but can demand the deficiency, unless he expressly stated in writing
either in the release or the compromise, or otherwise agreed, that he would be
content with the share which had been left or given to him, and would make no
demand for what was lacking; for then, all ground for complaint having been
removed, he should be compelled to accept his father's will.
(3) This law shall extend not only to sons and daughters, but also to all other
persons who have a right to institute proceedings, to declare the last
testaments of deceased persons inofficious.
Given on the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of Lampadius and
Orestes, 530.
36. The Same to John, Praetorian Prefect.
We know that before the promulgation of the constitution by which it was
provided that if a father left his son a smaller share of his estate than he
legally was entitled to, although it may not have been added that the balance
owing to him should be granted in accordance with the judgment of a reliable
citizen, the deficiency will be due and payable by operation of law. Hence,
when anyone accepted property which had been donated either inter vivosor
mortis causa,or by legacies, or under the terms of a will, and kept it as his
share, and the property was afterwards evicted, either wholly or in part, the
question arose whether, in accordance with the terms of Our Constitution, the
lawful share should be made up after eviction, or whether the legacies, trusts,
or donations mortis causashould be diminished in accordance with the Falcidian
Law, so that, in this instance, a reserve might be established to prevent the
heir, if he attempted to obtain all of the Falcidian portion, from losing the
entire benefit of the estate.
Therefore, We order that, in all these cases, the defect shall be corrected
whether there is total or partial eviction, and that either other property or
money shall be given, or the deficit made up, without taking into consideration
the Falcidian portion; so that whether there
was something lacking in the beginning, or some other outside cause had arisen
for imposing the burden on the property, either with reference to the amount,
or the time, the deficiency shall by all means be made up, and the privilege
which We have granted be enjoyed by the children without modification.
The deficit should be made up from the property forming part of the estate of
the father, but not where the son has acquired anything from other sources,
either through substitution, or by the right of accrual, as, for instance,
through usufruct. For the sake of humanity, We order that he shall enjoy the
benefit of all property which he may have acquired from foreign sources, and
that the deficiency shall be made up only from that which belonged to his
father.
(1) Where anyone, after having appointed a stranger his heir, provided by his
will that at the time of his death his estate should be transferred to his son,
or postponed such delivery to a specified date, for the reason that Our
previously promulgated Constitution sets forth that all delay and hindrance
with reference to the Falcidian portion shall be abolished, and that the said
fourth part shall be immediately given to the son, a doubt arose as to what
course should be taken in a case of this kind. Hence, We now order that the
restitution of the aforesaid fourth shall immediately take place, without
waiting for the death of the heir, or for the expiration of any term, and that
any balance remaining after the payment of the lawful share shall be delivered
at the time fixed by the testator, so that the son may, in this way, receive
his share intact, as has been established by Our laws and Constitutions; and
the appointed heir may legally enjoy the benefit of what was left to him by the
testator.
(2) Moreover, We order that the time for filing a complaint on the ground that
the will is inofficious, after the estate has been entered upon, shall be in
conformity with the decision of Ulpianus; and that the opinion of Herennius
Modestinus, who declared that the time for the bringing of such an action
should date from the death of the testator, must be rejected; so that an heir
shall not be permitted to enter upon an estate whenever he pleases, in order
that a son may not, by a device of this kind, be defrauded of that to which he
is naturally entitled.
Therefore, We order that when a testator dies after having appointed a foreign
heir, and it is expected that a suit to declare the will inofficious will be
filed, the appointed heir --- if there is one residing in the same province ---
shall be required within six months, or if he resides in another province,
within a year from the time of the death of the testator, to declare his
intention of either accepting or rejecting the estate; and that when the said
term has elapsed, the son shall have the right to bring the above-mentioned
action. Where the appointed heir does not accept the estate within the
specified time, he shall be forced to do so by the judge. If, however, in the
meantime, the son should die, that is to say, after the date of the death of
the testator, but before the estate has been entered upon, he will transmit
a right of action of this kind to his descendants, although he may not have
been prepared to assert it; but, in accordance with the ancient authorities, he
will not transmit it to foreign heirs, excepting where he had previously made
arrangements to proceed.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof September, after the fifth Consulate
of Lampadius and Orestes, 531.
37. The Same to John, Praetorian Prefect.
As it was stated by the ancient laws that military wills were not liable to
proceedings to declare them inofficious, many other instances arose in which it
was necessary to dispose of doubtful questions which presented themselves. For
in cases involving castrense peculium,another division was introduced, for
peculiumwas found to be derived from three different sources, as it was either
civil, acquired through military service, or occupied a middle place between
the two, and was designated quasi castrense.When the peculiumcalled quasi
castrensewas involved, permission was granted to certain persons to dispose of
it by will, but not as soldiers, in any way they chose, but by observing the
common, legal, and customary formalities which have been established with
reference to Proconsuls, the prefects of legions, the governors of provinces,
and, generally speaking, all those who have been appointed by Us to different
offices or employments, or who receive certain salaries from public sources;
for persons of this kind have testamentary capacity solely for the purpose of
disposing of the peculiumjust mentioned, that is to say, the quasi
castrense.Veterans, however, who have acquired peculiumduring their time of
service, after they have left the army, are not prohibited from making wills,
but they must do so in the regular manner. Therefore, when with reference to
all these quasi castrense peculiumsa doubt arose whether wills disposing of
property of this kind could be attacked on the ground of inofficiousness, the
first question to be decided was whether all those who had quasi castrense
peculiumcould bequeath it, for the reason that this was granted as a privilege
only to certain persons, and not to everyone indiscriminately; as soldiers and
veterans had been everywhere permitted to make wills disposing of their
castrense peculium;but while soldiers in active service could do so by virtue
of their own exclusive right, veterans were only entitled to dispose of their
peculiumunder the rules of the Common Law.
It was also doubted whether other persons, upon whom this special privilege had
not been conferred, could bequeath their peculiumby will; as, for instance,
advocates, clerks of courts, those who have charge of the property of others,
as well as professors of liberal arts, physicians, and all persons who receive
public salaries or allowances.
(1) Hence We order that such persons can make testamentary disposition of what
composes their quasi castrense peculium,for the reason that it has been
established in imitation of the peculium castrense,provided this is done
strictly in accordance with law, but
only where the property in question forms part of the quasi castrense peculium.
This privilege is granted to them in order to avoid suit being brought to
declare their wills inofficious; for where a freedman, who was undoubtedly his
own master, has acquired any property while in camp, his patron has not,
according to the tenor of the ancient laws, any right to the possession of such
property, even if he should be passed over by his ungrateful freedman in his
will; and, as this is the case, why should the peculiumswhich have been
introduced in imitation of the castrensebe liable to the complaint of
inofficiousness?
(2) This rule, however, shall be observed until those in possession of the
castrense peculiumhave returned to the homes of their relatives; for if they
should become their own masters, there is no doubt that their wills disposing
of property which formerly constituted their castrense peculiumcan be attacked
on the ground of inofficiousness, as the distinctive name of peculiumno longer
exists, and what it represents is merged in other property, and is subject to
the same fate as that which was collected from all other sources into a single
estate.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof September, after the fifth Consulate
of Lampadius and Orestes, 532.
TITLE XXIX. CONCERNING INOFFICIOUS DONATIONS.
1. The Emperor Philip to Nicanor and Papiana.
If, as you allege, your mother, for the purpose of avoiding an action to
declare the disposition of her property inofficious, exhausted almost all of it
while she was alive, by making donations either to certain children or to
strangers, and after having appointed you heirs to two-twelfths of her estate,
still further exhausted the two-twelfths aforesaid, by means of legacies and
trusts, you do not unjustly ask that relief be granted you by means of
proceedings to declare the will inofficious, inasmuch as you did not receive
the fourth part of the estate to which you were entitled.
Given on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Philip and Titian.
2. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to Acria.
If your father, induced by a certain impulse of boundless generosity, bestowed
all of his estate upon his son, whether he was under his control or not, and
agreed that the arbitrator appointed for the purpose of making partition should
give you the fourth part of the share which you would have received in case of
intestacy, without deduction; or if the son had been emancipated, and for this
reason the donation did not then require any other support, but in accordance
with the Imperial Constitutions, relies upon its own force, the Governor of the
province will assist you to proceed against the donation in the same way as
against an inofficious will.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Glabrio, 257.
3. The Same to aelianus.
The Rescripts attached to your petition show that those parents who, during
their lifetime, exhausted their estates by extravagant donations, after having
executed wills, left merely an empty name to their heirs, and the same rule of
equity should apply in this case as in that where persons die intestate.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of the same
Emperors; the first, Consul for the fourth time, and the second, Consul for the
third time, 258.
4. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Aristina.
If your son has exhausted his estate through unbounded liberality, invoke the
aid of the Governor of the province, who, after having ascertained the truth of
the case, will determine whether you are entitled to complete restitution on
account of the enormous amount of the donation made by your son, and will grant
you relief by annulling everything which has been improperly done; and
therefore, it will not be necessary for you to proceed against this
unreasonable donation, as you would in case you desired to establish the
inofficiousness of a will.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof February, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Acquilinus, 286.
5. The Same to Cotabeus.
If you have exhausted all your property by donations conferred upon your
emancipated son, the amount which will be necessary to leave to children, who
have not been ungrateful, for the purpose of avoiding proceedings to declare
the will inofficious, must be deducted from the donations already made and
restored to your estate; so that any sons or grandsons subsequently born during
lawful marriage, may obtain the amount of property to which they will be
entitled.
Given on the second of the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Acquilinus, 286.
6. The Same to Demetriana.
As you state that the property of your father has been exhausted by donations
made to your brothers, and that the remainder has been divided between you by
codicils executed by him; if you did not know his intention, and could not
avail yourself of the benefit of age, so as to institute proceedings, the dowry
given by your father, or the trust left by him for your benefit, are not
sufficient to prevent you from bringing suit to declare the will inofficious;
and the Governor of the province shall exert his authority to enable you to
proceed against these excessive donations, in the same way as against an
inofficious will.
Given on the Kalendsof May, during the above-mentioned Consulate, 286.
7. The Same to Ammiamis.
If your mother has so exhausted her estate by her profuse liberality to your
brothers that half of the fourth share, which would have been sufficient to
prevent you from attacking the will as inofficious, was not included in the
donations which she gave you, the unreasonable amount which she has bestowed
shall be revoked.
Given on the fifth of the Ides ofMay, during the above-mentioned Consulate,
286.
8. The Same to Auxanonus.
If it can be proved that your mother, in order to prevent you from bringing an
action to declare her will inofficious, exhausted her estate in donations made
to one of her sons, as reason demands that the right to bring suit for
inofficiousness should be accorded, in order to frustrate the designs of those
who attempt to violate the rules established by the supreme authority, and
deprive children of their rights, the donations which have been made must be
diminished to the extent of the fourth due under the Falcidian Law, as in the
case of an inofficious will.
(1) Where a wife received something from her husband by way of donation at the
time of her marriage, and afterwards gave it to her emancipated son with the
consent of her husband, it is only reasonable to hold that she donated it as
part of the property of his father, because it could not be taken from it
otherwise, as this is forbidden by the marriage; and if the same intention and
result should be ascertained to exist in the disposition of any of his
property, the same rule which We have promulgated with reference to the estate
of the mother shall be observed.
Given on the third of the Idesof September, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
294.
9. The Emperor Constantius, and the Caesar Julian, to Olybrius.
There should be no doubt that the complaint introduced by law with reference to
excessive donations has been derived from the action to declare wills
inofficious, so that, in both these instances, there might be an identical or
similar cause, and the same intervals and method of procedure.
Given on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Taurus
and Florentius, 361.
TITLE XXX. CONCERNING INOFFICIOUS DOWRIES.
1. The Emperor Constantine to Maximus, Governor of Cilicia.As all the property
of your mother is said to have been exhausted by a dowry, and since it is
proper for laws to agree with one another,
power to bring suit on the ground of the gift of an excessive dowry shall be
granted, and the benefits claimed by the other children, and to which they are
entitled, shall be bestowed upon them.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof June, during the Consulate of Tatian and
Cerealus, 358.
TITLE XXXI.
CONCERNING THE DEMAND FOR AN ESTATE.
1. The Emperor Marcus aelius Antoninus to Augurinus, Proconsul of Africa.
The Decree of the Senate enacted at the suggestion of My Grandfather, the
Divine Hadrian, by which it was provided that whatever had, at any time, been
evicted from the government must be returned, not only applies to fiscal cases,
but also to those of private persons claiming an. estate.
(1) Bona fidepossessors cannot be compelled to refund interest which they have
collected from the day of the sale of the property of an estate made by them
before issue has been joined in a case; nor can they be forced to surrender the
crops which they have gathered after issue has been joined, unless they have
profited pecuniarily thereby. They will, however, be obliged, under all
circumstances, to pay over not only the income of property which has not been
sold, and which they have collected, but also whatever they could have
collected, as well as any interest on the price of property sold which accrued
before issue was joined in the case.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of Clarus
and Cethegus, 147.
2. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to the Soldier Marcellus.
When, after suit had been brought with reference to the estate of Menecrates,
Museus, being aware that this had been done, purchased half of the property of
the estate in dispute from the appointed heir, he himself, as a possessor in
bad faith, as well as his heir, will be compelled to refund the profits. If,
however, it should be clearly proved that the sale took place before the action
was brought, the profits must be refunded from the day on which proceedings
were begun, for an estate is increased by the profits when it is in possession
of a person from whom it can be demanded. A purchaser, who is provided with his
own title to possession, can also be sued for separate articles.
Given on the Kalendsof July, under the Consulate of Severus, Consul for the
second time, and Victorinus, 201.
3. The Same to Epictesis.
The claim made by you for the estate of your maternal aunt does not prevent you
from making a demand for another estate which proceeds from a different
succession. But where the first claim was based upon the inofficiousness of the
will, the fact that the case had been de-
cided will offer no impediment to anyone claiming the same estate under another
title.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof August, during the Consulate of Geta and
Plautian, 201.
4. The Emperor Antoninus to Vitalianus.
In transferring the estate, compensation will be allowed for any expense which
you can prove you have incurred on account of the illness of the deceased, or
for his funeral, and which you have paid in good faith out of your own money.
Given on the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Antoninus, Consul for the
fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
5. The Same to Posthumianus.
If a decree has been issued requiring you to surrender the estate which you
possess in good faith, you can, when delivering it, deduct whatever you can
show that you have paid in good faith to the creditors of said estate, for
whenever creditors have received anything to which they are entitled, it cannot
be recovered from them.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof June, during the Consulate of Antoninus,
Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
6. The Emperor Alexander to Firminus.
If you think that the guardians of your grandsons were not legally appointed,
for the reason that you allege they are under your control, do not delay to
demand from them the estate of your emancipated son, the benefit of which you
say belongs to you; and the judge will determine whether the act of those who
appointed the guardians shall be set aside or not, as it is denied that they
are subject to your authority.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Julian,
Consul for the second time, and Crispinus, 225.
7. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Restituta.
It is known to everyone that a demand for an estate which can be made against
possessors in behalf of an heir will not be barred by a prescription of long
time, as the law requires this to be answered in a mixed personal action. It
is, however, clear that the estate can be recovered only by special actions in
rem,where the right of the plaintiff to proceed has been extinguished by
usucaption or prescription.
Given on the second of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.
8. The Same, and the Caesars, to Asterius.
When a demand is made for an estate, it must be ascertained, before everything
else, whether or not the testator was free.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
300.
9. The Same, and the Caesars, to Demophilia.
If the appointed heirs have rejected the estate of your relative which was left
to them, and you have demanded it, either under the praetorian or the Civil Law,
you can bring suit to recover any property of the estate which is involved in
this case.
Given at Nicomedia, on the third of the Kalendsof December, during the
Consulate of the Caesars, 300.
10. The Same, and the Caesars, to Theodosia.
When a son under paternal control has, for a long time, retained in his hands
an estate which was left to him, for this very reason, as the estate has been
accepted, he is considered to have acquired it for the benefit of his father.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 300.
11. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to aeternal, Proconsul of Asia.
It is unjust for the possessor of property to be compelled to disclose his
title to possession to anyone who demands it, except that he should be obliged
to say whether he holds the said property as possessor or as heir.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Arcadius,
Consul for the seventh time, and Honorius, Consul for the third time, 396.
12. The Emperor Justinian to Julian, Praetorian Prefect.
When good ground exists for the claim of an estate, and an exception is filed
which protects the claim, this should not be prejudiced, for the greatness and
authority of the Centumviral Tribunal will not permit a claim to an estate to
be interfered with by the schemes of others.
As many distinctions and controversies on this point arose among the ancients,
in order to put an end to them We decree that when any person presents a claim
for an estate, or expects to do so, or to institute proceedings to recover it,
and someone else appears and thinks that it is necessary to represent the
deceased in an action against either the plaintiff or the defendant, on the
ground of a deposit, a loan, a legacy, a trust, or for any other reason, and he
does this by virtue of the bequest of a legacy or a trust, he must comply with
the following conditions, namely, the appointed heir cannot postpone the
decision of the claim by furnishing security, but either the legacy or the
trust can be demanded, if a bond or security in proportion to the rank of the
parties is given.
Where, however, the heir is not successful, the legatee or the beneficiary of
the trust must repay him the money which he received, with interest at the rate
of three per cent; or he must give up the land with the crops which he has
gathered, or the house with the rent which he has collected; of course, in
either of these cases, after having deducted all necessary and useful expenses,
or if he himself prefers to contest the action and await the result of the
filing of the claim for the estate,
he shall be permitted to do this; so that if restitution should be obtained it
may be made to the legatee or the beneficiary of the trust, together with all
lawful augmentations.
(1) But when an action based on certain contracts of the deceased, or on
account of some property which is in dispute, is brought against the possessor
of the estate, and the said property was either made the subject of a deposit
or a loan, or was given in pledge, or encumbered in any other way, the trial
should not be postponed under the pretext that a claim has been made to the
estate; just as where money having been loaned at interest, suit is brought
against the possessor or the plaintiff, or any other personal action is begun,
judgment should not be deferred, but the case ought immediately to be brought
to a termination. For, after the action for the estate has been disposed of,
and the controversy between the claimant of the estate and the possessor has
been decided, if the latter is defeated, he will not be compelled to surrender
the estate, unless the claimant reimburses him for all the expenses which he
has properly incurred. If, however, the plaintiff should be defeated, the court
will compel the possessor, in like manner, to reimburse him, or if he should be
remiss in this respect, he can under this law be forced to comply by a personal
action based on voluntary agency.
(2) Whenever freedom is demanded by slaves from the possessor of the estate or
the claimant of the same, to which it is alleged they are entitled either under
the terms of a trust, or directly by operation of law, it will only be
necessary to wait for a year after the death of the testator; and if the action
to recover the estate has been terminated within that time, the demand for
freedom shall either take effect, or be extinguished, according to the event of
the trial. But if the said period of a year should elapse without a decision,
then on account of the favor with which freedom is regarded, as well as through
considerations of humanity, the grants of freedom will become effective
directly, or the slaves will obtain it under the terms of the trust; provided,
however, that the will should not prove to be forged, and also under the
condition that if the slaves in question had not had charge of some business or
accounts; for even after they have obtained their freedom, they will be
required to surrender any property belonging to the estate which may have
remained in their hands, and to render their accounts by the right of
patronage, that is to say, where this right is enjoyed by him who, by the laws,
can be assigned to this duty.
(3) In order that no doubt may hereafter arise, it must be observed that a suit
brought to recover an estate must always be included among bona fideactions.
Dated at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Lampadius and Orestes, 530.
TITLE XXXII. CONCERNING THE ACTION FOR THE RECOVERY OF PROPERTY.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Caecilia..It has been decided that
anyone who possesses the slave of another in good faith is entitled to the
ownership of what is acquired by the
labor of said slave, or from the use of his property; and therefore, if you
possessed a slave of this kind in good faith, and he purchased any property
with your money during the time he was under your control, you can avail
yourself of your means of defence in accordance with the rules of law.
(1) A slave belonging to another cannot acquire anything for his possessor in
bad faith, for he who holds him will not only be compelled to give up the slave
himself, but also anything that he has obtained by means of his labor, as well
as the offspring of female slaves, and the increase of animals.
Given on the third of the Nonesof May, during the Consulate of Faustinus and
Rufus, 211.
2. The Emperor Antoninus to Aristenetus.
If you can prove that the lower part of the building which is attached to the
soil belongs to you, anything which your neighbor has built upon it will
undoubtedly be your property, for whatever is erected upon your ground will
belong to you by law, as long as it remains in the same condition; but if it
should be demolished, the materials composing it will be restored to their
former ownership, whether the building has been constructed in good or bad
faith; provided it was not erected on land belonging to another with the
intention of presenting it to him.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of
Antoninus, Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
3. The Emperor Alexander to Dominia.
Your mother or your husband cannot, without your consent or knowledge, legally
sell a tract of land which belongs to you, and you can claim it as yours from
the possessor, without even tendering him the price. But if you afterwards
consented to the sale, or lost your ownership of the property in some other
way, you will have no right of action against the. purchaser, but you will not
be prevented from bringing suit against the vendor, for the price, on the
ground of business transacted.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of
Alexander, Consul for the second time, and Marcellus, 227.
4. The Emperor Gordian to Munianus, Soldier of Africa.
You are entitled to an action against the possessors who purchased your land in
good faith from others who held possession of it in bad faith, if you should
recover the ownership of the same before the purchasers have obtained it by
usucaption or prescription, based upon long time.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of Pius
and Pontianus, 299.
5. The Same to Herasianus.
The Governor of the province shall order the house which you allege belongs to
you as part of the estate of your mother, and which is
now illegally occupied by an adverse party, to be restored to you, together
with any rent that the occupant has, or could have collected, as well as the
amount of all damage caused by him.
It has been very properly stated in a rescript that any expenses which may have
been incurred cannot be recovered, as possessors in bad faith, who have
expended money on the property of others, and have not transacted the business
of those to whom it actually belongs, have no right to recover them, unless the
said expenses were necessary; but they are permitted to deduct any useful
outlay, if this can be done without injury to the former condition of the
property.
Given on the second of the Idesof February, during the Consulship of Gordian
and Aviola, 240.
6. The Same to Ustronius.
If you deposited money, and the person with whom you left it used it to
purchase land for himself, which was delivered to him, it is contrary to law
that the said land, or any portion of the same, should be transferred to you by
way of compensation for the money expended, when this is done against the
consent of him who obtained it.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof July, during the Consulship of Gordian and
Aviola, 240.
7. The Emperor Philip, and the Caesar Philip, to Antony.
It has been established by law that the offspring of a female slave follows the
condition of its mother, and in a case of this kind the condition of the father
should not be taken into consideration.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of
Philip and Titian, 246.
8. The Same, and the Caesars, to the Soldier Philip.
If (as you allege), your adversary has purchased certain property in his own
name, with your money, the Governor of the province will not, in the name of
justice, refuse you the right to which you are entitled as a soldier. He may,
likewise, grant you an action of mandate, or one of voluntary agency, if you
desire to bring it.
Given on the second of the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of Praesens and
Albinus, 247.
9. The Emperors Carus, Carinus, and Numerian to Antony.
Notify the Governor that the female slave, with reference to whom you have
filed your petition, forms part of the dotal property, and this having been
shown, there will be no doubt that she cannot be recovered by your wife.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Carus and
Carinus, 283.
10. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Jamiarius.
As you assert that you have no documents establishing your ownership over
slaves born in your house, you should file your claim before
the tribunal where proceedings have been instituted to recover what you have
stated in your petition, since the judge will know that the ownership of the
slaves must be established either by the production of documents, as well as by
other evidence, or by the interrogation of the slaves themselves.
Given on the Idesof February, during the Consulate of the abovementioned
Emperors, the first, Consul for the fourth time, and the second, Consul for the
third time, 290.
11. The Same, and the Caesars, to Gallanus.
When anyone knowingly sows or plants land owned by another, it is in accordance
with reason that as soon as whatever is sowed or planted takes root, it will
belong to the soil. For, by an act of this kind, the crop will rather belong to
the owner than the soil to the other party. Where, however, he who did this is
a possessor in good faith, it is well established by legal authority that he
can, by means of an exception on the ground of bad faith, recover his expenses
from him who claims the ownership of the land.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof March, during the abovementioned
Consulate, 293.
12. The Same, and the Consuls, to Alexander.
It is unjust and unusual that the slave whom you have delivered, and whose
ownership you have relinquished by so doing, should be restored to you by Our
Rescript, against the consent of the person to whom you delivered him;
therefore, understand that where a female servant has become the property of a
purchaser, any children subsequently born to her follow the ownership of him to
whom their mother belonged at the time of their birth. You can, however, sue
your adversary for the price, if it should not be proved that you have already
received it.
Given on the Idesof April, under the above-mentioned Consulate, 293.
13. The Same, and the Caesars, to Cytichius.
It is an ordinary rule of law that, where suit is brought with reference to
slaves, the question of possession must first be determined, after the slaves
have been produced in court, and that then their ownership shall be established
by the same judge.
Given on the Idesof April, during the above-mentioned Consulate, 293.
14. The Same, and the Caesars, to Septiana.
As you state that you knowingly purchased from your mother a house which
belonged to her son, if the latter should not succeed his mother, but should
claim the ownership of the house, you cannot protect yourself by means of an
exception; because if the son should obtain the estate of his mother who sold
the property, you will not be prevented from availing yourself of an exception
on the ground of
bad faith with reference to the share of the estate which may come into his
hands.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof July, during the above-mentioned Consulate,
293.
15. The Same, and the Caesars, to Aurelius Proculinus.
Where an entire tract of land has been legally sold to two different persons,
it is a plain rule of law that he to whom delivery was first made is entitled
to the preference, so far as the ownership of the property is concerned. If,
therefore, you can prove before the Governor of the province that you were the
first to obtain possession, and paid the price, he will not permit you to be
excluded, under the pretext that no instruments had been drawn up.
You will, indeed, have the choice of retaining the land, or of receiving the
purchase-money which you have paid, with interest; but, in the latter instance,
an account of the crops which have been gathered and of the expense incurred
must be rendered. It has been decided that if you both claim the ownership on
the ground of a donation, he to whom possession of the land was first
transferred will have the preference.
Given on the second of the Kalendsof October, during the abovementioned
Consulate, 293.
16. The Same, and the Caesars, to Januarius.
When anyone builds a house upon land owned in common with others, the rule of
law establishes joint-ownership among all of you, and hence, if you should
desire to claim the share of the person who, while in possession, built the
house in good faith, you must make a tender of the expenses, in order to avoid
being barred by an exception on the ground of bad faith.
Given on the Idesof November, during the above-mentioned Consulate, 293.
17. The Same, and the Caesars, to Sabinus and Others.
If you notified the person who intended to purchase your land that it did not
belong to him who wished to sell it, he who bought it against your protest, or,
in any other way, made a contract in bad faith, will commit an illegal act; and
if you apply to the Governor of the province, he will not only order that the
land which you prove belongs to you, but also the crops which the vendor is
shown to have gathered in bad faith, shall be restored to you.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof December, during the abovementioned
Consulate, 293.
18. The Same, and the Caesars, to Clarus.
When your property is in the possession of someone else, any mistake in
ownership growing out of this fact cannot prejudice your rights, unless some
other question may be interposed against you.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof January, during the abovementioned
Consulate, 293.
19. The Same, and the Caesars, to Callistratus.
Absolute proofs which are not rejected by law are not less worthy of confidence
than documentary evidence; for which reason if you have doubts with reference
to the ownership of a house, and the matter has not yet been decided, you will
not be prevented from introducing what testimony you have.
Given on the second of the Kalendsof January, during the abovementioned
Consulate, 293.
20. The Same, and the Caesars, to Quartilla.
You understand that you cannot sue a slave who you say retains your property,
but you must proceed against his master in order to recover it.
Given on the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of the Caesars, 294.
21. The Same, and the Caesars, to Hierocles.
After having demanded your slaves from those who have possession of them, and
having instituted proceedings to establish your ownership of the same, if
afterwards, when your claim has been allowed, your slaves should not be
restored to you, the judgment shall be executed after the formal oath has been
taken.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof October, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
294.
22. The Same, and the Caesars, to Diodota.
There is no doubt that it is customary for all the crops along with the land to
be surrendered by a possessor in bad faith; and that possessors in good faith
must only restore the present crops, but, after issue has been joined,
everything must be delivered up.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.
23. The Same, and the Caesars, to Magnifer.
If other persons, without any good reason, should sell your slave, who had been
carried away by force or stolen, you will not be reduced to the necessity of
paying the price given for him when you bring suit to recover the ownership of
the slave.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.
24. The Same, and the Caesars, to Julian.
The law forbids possessors to demand ownership, if they did not obtain
possession by a good title; and therefore, if usucaption does not take place,
the claim of ownership can never be asserted. Hence, in a case of this kind,
where the owner returns under the law of postliminium,the direct right to
prosecute the claim to the property remains unimpaired, without his having
recourse to the Actio rescissaria.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.
25. The Same, and the Caesars, to Eugnomius.
Where anyone has paid for another the rent of property which is in possession
of the latter, and no sale takes place, he does not, by any means, become the
owner of the same by virtue of the payment.
Given at Nicomedia, on the sixth of the Kalendsof December, during the
Consulate of the Caesars, 294.
26. The Same, and the Consuls, to Heliodorus.
The delays incident to litigation are of no advantage to a possessor for the
acquisition of the property by prescription based upon long-continued
possession, for this is only computed after issue has been joined in the case.
Given on the Idesof December, under the Consulate of the Caesars,
294.
27. The Same, and the Caesars, to Philadelphus.
A purchaser cannot bring suit to recover a slave who has not immediately been
delivered to him.
Given at Nicomedia, on the twelfth of the Kalendsof January, under the
Consulate of the Caesars, 294.
28. The Same, and the Caesars, to Sopater.
He who is in possession of property belonging to another cannot be compelled to
restore it to its owner, even though he may have no good cause to retain it,
unless the alleged owner proves that it is his.
Dated on the eighth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.


TITLE XXXIII. CONCERNING USUFRUCT, LODGING, AND THE SERVICE OF SLAVES.

1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Possidonius.
Where the usufruct of her entire estate was left by the will of a wife to her
husband, although she may have forbidden any bond to be required of you, still,
you cannot accept money in payment from debtors, unless you furnish security in
compliance with the terms of the Decree of the Senate.
Given on the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Anulinus and Pronto,
200.

2. The Same to Felix.
We note that the usufruct of certain land has been bequeathed to you by the
terms of a will which you have inserted into your petition, but this does not
prevent the owner of the property from encumbering it to his creditor, provided
the right of the usufruct to which you are entitled remains unimpaired.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof May, during the second Consulate of Antoninus
and Geta, 206.

3. The Emperor Antoninus to Antonianus.
If the usufruct of property was bequeathed to you by your father, you will
obtain nothing after his death, as an usufruct which has been left by will, or
is acquired in any other manner, ordinarily reverts to the property at the time
of the death of the person to whom it was bequeathed.
The right of use and enjoyment is not extinguished during the life of the
usufructuary, even though the owner of the property may die.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Antoninus,
Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.

4. The Emperor Alexander to Verbicius.
An usufruct having been established, it follows that security which would be
approved by a good citizen must be furnished by the person who enjoys the
benefit of it, that he will cause no injury to the property by making use of
the same; and it does not make any difference whether the usufruct was
established by will or by voluntary contract.
Given on the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Alexander, Consul for the
second time, and Marcellus, 227.

5. The Same to Evocatus and Others.
If your father left the usufruct of certain land to your mother during the time
of your puberty, and the usufruct terminated after you grew up, you can recover
the crops gathered by her after the abovementioned time, for she knew that she
had no reason to take them as they belonged to another.
Given on the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Alexander, Consul for the
second time, and Marcellus, 227.

6. The Same to Stratonica.
It makes a difference where your husband received the sole usufruct by way of
dowry, and where the ownership was given as dowry, and a contract was entered
into that at his death possession would be restored to you, for an usufructuary
cannot pledge the property. He, however, who has received land as dowry, after
it has been appraised, is not, for that reason, prevented from encumbering it,
as, if the marriage should be dissolved, the appraised value must be repaid to
you.
Given on the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Agricola and Clementinus,
231.

7. The Emperor Gordian to the Soldier Ulpian.
It is an established rule of law that the person to whom an usufruct belongs
must, at his own expense, make such repairs as the roofs require. Hence, if
anything more than was necessary has been expended by you, you can prove the
amount of the outlay, and bring an action to recover it.
Given on the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of Arianus and Pappus,
224.

8. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Ethero.
No prescription, or lapse of time, will authorize an usufructuary or his
successors to acquire the ownership of property to the usufruct of which alone
they are entitled.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof July, during the above-mentioned Consulate,
293.

9. The Same, and the Caesars, to Auxanusa.
Where the usufruct of certain lands and slaves was left to your mother, she is
forbidden to alienate the land or manumit the slaves; for, as she has not the
ownership of the slaves whose services were bequeathed to her by will, it is
clear that her act will be void if she should convey the property to anyone, or
manumit the slaves, both of which belong to the heir of the testator.
Given on the Kalendsof December, during the above-mentioned Consulate, 293.

10. The Same, and the Caesars, to Pomponius.
If the owner of the property has leased the usufruct of the same to your wife,
subject to the payment of a certain sum every year; your wife should not be
denied the privilege of use and enjoyment of the property after the death of
the person who leased it to her.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the above-mentioned
Consulate, 293.

11. The Emperor Justinian to Theodore.
The right to occupy a lodging is terminated by death, and he who enjoys it
cannot, by bequeathing the property, exclude the owner from recovering the
same.
Given at Constantinople, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof November, after the
fifth Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes, 531.

12. The Emperor Justinian to Julian, Praetorian Prefect.
With the intention of disposing of the ambiguity of the ancient law, We decree
that when anyone has left an usufruct to his wife, or to any other person, to
be enjoyed for a certain time until his son or someone else shall become of
age, the usufruct shall stand for the time prescribed by the testator, whether
the person with reference to whose age it was established arrives at that age
or not, for the testator did not have the life of the individual, but a certain
specified term in view, unless he to whom the usufruct was bequeathed should
die; for then it would be impossible for the usufruct to be transmitted to his
successors, as it is an undoubted rule of law that an usufruct is absolutely
extinguished by death.
Where, however, the condition was inserted that it would continue to exist
while the son, or anyone else remained insane, or under other
similar circumstances the result of which was uncertain, and the said son or
other party concerning whom the provision was made should recover his senses,
or the condition should be complied with, the usufruct will be terminated. But
if the person referred to should die while still insane, then the usufruct will
continue to exist, as it would be considered to have been bequeathed for the
life of the usufructuary, since it was possible that the testator had in mind
its continuance during the entire time of the life of the usufructuary, rather
than that the insane person should recover his mental faculties, or the
condition be complied with; and it is perfectly equitable that the usufruct
should be extended during the lifetime of the parties alluded to; for, if the
usufructuary should die before the condition had been complied with, or the
insanity ended, it would be extinguished; and therefore it is just for it to be
prolonged during the life of the usufructuary, even if the insane person should
die before him, or the other condition fail to be executed.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof August, during the fifth Consulate of
Lampadius and Orestes, 530.

13. The Same to the Same Julian, Praetorian Prefect.
As a doubt arose in ancient times, when the usufruct of a house was bequeathed,
in the first place (as the instances are similar), whether the right of lodging
referred to the use and usufruct or to neither of them, that is to say, to a
peculiar right and a special privilege, and whether the person to whom the
right of lodging had been bequeathed could afterwards lease the same, or claim
for himself the ownership of the property, We, for the purpose of disposing of
the disputes of litigants, have removed all such doubts by the following
concise opinion. Where anyone has bequeathed a lodging, it appears to Us to be
the more humane opinion to also grant to the legatee the right to lease it, for
what difference does it make whether the legatee himself remains there, or
gives it up to another for the purpose of receiving compensation? This is much
more apparent if he left the usufruct of the dwelling, as it gives rise to
greater difficulty where the name usufruct is added, for We do not desire that
the lodging should take precedence of the usufruct. The legatee should not
expect to obtain the ownership of the right of residence, unless he can prove
by the clearest evidence that the ownership of the house was also left to him,
for then the will of the testator must in every respect be obeyed.
We decree that this decision shall apply to all places in which a right of
habitation can be established.
Given on the eighteenth of the Kalendsof October, during the fifth Consulate of
Lampadius and Orestes, 530.

14. The Same to the Same Julian, Praetorian Prefect.
Where anyone bequeathed a tract of land, or any other property to another by
will, it was formerly doubted to what extent the usufruct would remain with the
heir, and whether a legacy of this kind would
be valid. Some authorities thought that it would be void, for the reason that
the usufruct could never return to the ownership, but would always remain with
the heir, and they probably held this opinion because the second heir and all
other successors appeared to be the heirs of one person, and therefore an
usufruct of this kind, in accordance with the ancient distinction, could not be
extinguished in the ordinary way. Others, however, thought that a legacy of
this description should not be rejected.
In order to put an end to all such disputes, We decree that such a legacy shall
be valid, and such an usufruct shall be extinguished with the death of the
heir, or shall be terminated if he loses it in any other lawful manner, for
wherefore should an usufruct of this kind enjoy such a privilege that it alone
can be excepted from the general rule which governs the extinction of usufruct?
It is perfectly clear that there is no good reason for this opinion, and
therefore We, by directing that the usufruct shall be terminated and returned
to the ownership, and the legacy be valid, have disposed of all this ambiguity
in very few words.
Given on the thirteenth of the KalendsofOctober, during the fifth Consulate of
Lampadius and Orestes, 530.

15. The Same to the Same Julian, Praetorian Prefect.
A disagreement arose among the jurists of ancient times, when an usufruct was
acquired by a slave for his master, and, on account of the occurrence of
certain events (for many unforeseen changes take place in the affairs of
mortals), part of the said slave comes into the possession of another person,
whether the entire usufruct, which was formerly held by a single individual
through the said slave, continued to belong to him, or whether it was entirely
extinguished, or was divided, and only a portion of it remained under the
control of him who formerly enjoyed it all.
Three opinions were given on this point; one was to the effect that the entire
usufruct was diminished by the alienation of the slave; another, that the
usufruct was only diminished in proportion to the alienation of the slave; the
third, that a share of the slave could be alienated, but that, nevertheless,
the entire usufruct would belong to the person who formerly owned the entire
slave. We find that the eminent legal authority Salvius Julianus adopted this
last opinion.
In order to dispose of this matter, We have decided to accept the opinion of
Salvius Julianus, and of the others who agreed with him, who considered it more
humane that the retention and not the destruction of the usufruct should be
considered, and hold that, even if a part of the slave was alienated, still no
portion of the usufruct will be extinguished; but it will, in accordance with
its nature, remain intact and unimpaired, and that it will be preserved just as
it was in the beginning, without being affected in any way by art occurrence of
this kind.
. Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof October, during the fifth Consulate of
Lampadius and Orestes, 530.


16. The Same to the Same Julian, Praetorian Prefect.
It was decided by the ancients that there were many causes for the extinction
of an usufruct; for instance, the death of the usufructuary, loss of civil
rights, non-user, and many others equally well known. No question, however,
existed with reference to the usufruct itself; but doubts arose concerning the
personal action which originated from it, whether the usufruct was conveyed by
a stipulation, or had been left by will. All the authorities, however, agreed
that it was extinguished by the death of the usufructuary, and by the
forfeiture of civil rights, but they differed as to whether the right of
personal action was extinguished by non-user, if the usufructuary failed to
claim the usufruct for one or two years.

(1) In order to remove these doubts, We hereby decree that not only the action
which arises from the usufruct, but even the right itself shall not be lost by
non-user, but only by the death of the usufructuary or by the destruction of
the property; but that anyone shall continue to hold intact as long as he lives
an usufruct which he may have acquired, unless an exception based on
prescription is pleaded against him, which can be done even if he claims the
ownership, for this will exclude him whether he is present or absent.
Although innumerable accidents occur in the affairs of mortals, on account of
which men cannot continue to hold property which they have, it is doubly hard
to lose, through difficulties of this kind, what one has once had in his
possession.

(2) We, however, do not permit our subjects to suffer injury through every kind
of loss of civil rights, for if you are a son under paternal control, and have
an usufruct which has been acquired from your castrense peculium,and to which
your father has no right, why should you lose by emancipation what you have in
your possession? But, according to what has been stated, it will now only be
lost when the usufructuary dies, or the property is destroyed; and as long as
he has breath, or the substance of the property exists, the usufructuary will
continue to exercise his right, unless barred by the above-mentioned exception,
or where he has suffered such a loss of civil rights as deprives anyone of
freedom or Roman citizenship; for, under such circumstances, the usufruct will
be absolutely extinguished, and will return to the ownership of the property.
Given on the Kalendsof October, at Constantinople, during the fifth Consulate
of Lampadius and Orestes, 530.


17. The Same to John, Praetorian Prefect.
The following question, taken from the books of the Sabinians, has been
referred to Us. A doubt having arisen whether an usufruct acquired by a slave,
or a son under paternal control, will continue to exist after the greater or
intermediate loss of civil rights by the son, or after his death or
emancipation, or after an alienation of the slave or his death or manumission,
We decree that, in cases of this kind, even if the said slave, or son under
paternal control, should be placed
in either of the aforesaid positions, the usufruct which was obtained by the
father or the master through the above-mentioned persons shall not be
extinguished, but shall remain intact.
Nor, even if the father should suffer either the greater or the intermediate
loss of civil rights, or should be removed by death, will the usufruct be lost;
but it will belong to the son, even if he was not appointed an heir by his
father, for the usufruct acquired through him will remain under his control
after his father's death; as it is very probable that the testator, in
bequeathing the usufruct, had the son rather than the father in his mind.
Given at Constantinople, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof November, after the
fifth Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes, 541.


* TITLE XXXIV. CONCERNING SERVITUDES AND WATER.

1. The Emperor Antoninus to Calpurnia.
If you think that you have any right of action against the person who rebuilt
his house in a different way than it formerly was, and which now interferes
with your lights, you will not be prevented from applying to the court in the
usual manner. The judge will be aware that custom observed for a long time
takes the place of a servitude, provided the party who makes complaint does not
hold possession by violence, or clandestinely, or under a precarious title.
Given on the third of the Idesof November, during the Consulate of Gentianus
and Bassus, 212.

2. The Same to Martial.
If you have conducted water through the premises of Martial, with his
knowledge, for the time prescribed by law for the establishment of a servitude,
you have acquired it. If, however, the use of the land was forbidden to you for
that period of time, you will, in vain, ask that the expenses incurred by you
for that purpose be refunded to you; for any work performed on the land of
another belongs to the owner of the same, as long as it remains in the same
condition.
Given on the Kalendsof July, under the Consulate of Laetus and Cerealis, 216.

3. The Emperor Alexander to Ricana.
The right to conduct water through the field of a neighbor, as well as other
servitudes, can be established in a province, if all the formalities required
for the creation of servitudes have previously been complied with, as
agreements made between contracting parties should be carried out; therefore
you will not be ignorant that where former possessors could not legally prevent
water from being conducted through their premises, the same land charged with
the same servitude will pass to purchasers.
Given on the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Maximus, Consul for the
second time, and aelianus, 224.

4. The Same to Cornelius.
The Edict of the Praetor does not permit water, whose source is on the ground of
another, to be conducted on the land of someone else, without the consent of
him to whom the use of said water belongs.
Given on the Idesof August, during the Consulate of Maximus, Consul for the
second time, and aelianus, 224.

5. The Emperor Philip to the Soldier Lucian.
If your opponent has unlawfully constructed anything which interferes with the
servitude owing to your house, the Governor of the province shall take care to
restore everything to its former condition, and cause satisfaction to be made
for the damage produced, in accordance with its seriousness.
Given on the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of Praesens and Albinus,
247.

6. The Emperor Claudius to Priscus.
The Governor of the province will not permit you to be deprived of the use of
water which flows from a spring which you allege belongs to you, contrary to
the rule established by custom; as it would be hard, and almost cruel, for a
water-course which arises on your premises to be unjustly used on those of your
neighbors, when your own land has need of it.
Given on the seventh of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Claudius and
Paternus, 270.

7. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Julian, Praetorian
Prefect.
If it can clearly be shown that the right to make use of water flowing from
certain places on certain lands has been established by ancient custom and
constant use, Our deputy shall provide that no innovation be made contrary to
this ancient rule and long-observed custom.
Given on the fourth of the Nonesof May, during the Consulate of Maximus, Consul
for the second time, and Acquilinus, 286.

8. The Same, and the Caesars, to Anicetus.
If your house does not owe a servitude to the land of your neighbor, the owner
of the latter cannot prevent you from raising your building higher. If Julian
should be convicted of having, either by violence or clandestinely, opened a
window in your wall, he can be compelled to remove the work at his own expense,
and restore the wall to its former condition.
Given on the Kalendsof January, during the above-mentioned Consulate, 293.

9. The Same, and the Caesars, to Zofimus.
If Heraclius has built the wall of his house higher than he should have done
because of a servitude due to you, his neighbor, he can be
compelled by the Governor of the province to remove the new work at his own
expense; but if it is not proved that you are entitled to a servitude, your
neighbor cannot be forbidden to raise his house to a greater
height.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of
the above-mentioned Emperors, 293.

10. The Same, and the Caesars, to Nemphydius.
If the Governor should ascertain that you are entitled to the servitude of
conducting water, and he does not find that you have lost it by nonuser during
the time prescribed by law, he must take measures to enable you to again enjoy
your right. Where, however, it is not proved that this is the case, the owner
of the land cannot be prevented from retaining the water on his own premises,
after having done work for that purpose in such a way that your field will not
be irrigated.
Given on the eleventh of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.

11. The Same, and the Caesars, to Aurelian.
A neighbor is not permitted to walk or drive through the land of another who
does not owe him a servitude, but no one can be legally prevented from making
use of the public highway.
Given on the eleventh of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.

12. The Same, and the Caesars, to Valeria.
Not the extent of the land, but the nature of the servitude, determined the
course of the water.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.

13. The Emperor Justinian to John, Praetorian Prefect.
As an usufruct is extinguished by non-user during the term of two years in the
case of land, and in a year where movable property or that which can move
itself is concerned, We do not allow a right of this kind to be lost in so
short a time, but We grant the terms of ten and twenty years for its
extinction, and We decree that this rule shall apply to other servitudes, so
that all servitudes cannot be lost by nonuser in two years (because they are
always attached to the soil), but that they can be lost in ten years, when the
parties are present, or in twenty when they are absent, in order that the rule
may be the same in all cases of this kind, and all differences be abolished.
Given at Constantinople, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof November, after the
fifth Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes, 531.

14. The Same to John, Praetorian Prefect.
The following point was discussed in the Sabinian Books: A certain man made an
agreement with his neighbor to permit him to pass through his fields, or to
allow his workmen to do so, and agreed that
he should have this right of way for only one day in five years, and be
permitted to go into his woods and cut down trees, or to do anything else that
he might consider to be necessary.
The question was asked when a servitude of this kind would be lost through
failure to use it, and some authorities held that if the grantee did not use
the right of way during the first or second term of five years, the servitude
would be entirely extinguished, as would be the case if it was not used for the
term of two years, counting each period of five years as only one; others,
however, were of a different opinion. It has seemed proper to Us to dispose of
the matter as follows, namely, as We have already decided, in a law previously
enacted, that servitudes shall not be extinguished by non-user during the term
of two years, but during those of ten or twenty years, and, in this instance,
if the grantee himself, or his employees, did not make use of the servitude for
one day during the four terms of five years, they would then lose it through
having neglected to avail themselves of it for twenty years, for he who does
not use his right for so long a period of time will be too late if he desires
its restoration.
(1) As that is a perfectly plain rule of law which forbids a neighbor to erect
a building opposite the threshing floor of another, where, by trampling the dry
grain, its benefit and utility may be secured, but, by the construction of such
a building, the wind will be obstructed, and, in consequence, the straw cannot
be separated from the grain, the wind being prevented by the building aforesaid
from exerting its force everywhere, and, because of its position, the wind will
be of no advantage to the threshing floor, We hereby decree that no one shall
be permitted either to build any house, or do anything else to prevent the wind
from being made use of in a proper and sufficient manner for the above-
mentioned purpose, and thereby render the threshing floor useless to its owner,
and unavailable for the separation of grain.
Given at Constantinople, on the eleventh of the Kalendsof November, after the
fifth Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes, 531.


* TITLE XXXV. CONCERNING THE AQUILIAN LAW.

1. The Emperor Alexander to Glytonis.
If you can prove that you have sustained any damage on account of someone
having burned your forest, or cut down its trees, you can make use of the
action of the Aquilian Law.
Given on the seventh of the Idesof November, during the Consulate of Alexander,
Consul for the second time, and Marcellus, 227.
2. The Emperor Gordian to Mutianus.
Having brought suit under the Aquilian Law against the person who demolished
your house, or burned it, or damaged it in some other way, you can compel the
damage to be made good by applying to a competent judge. Moreover, if you have
been unjustly deprived of the
use of water to which you are entitled, you can, by application to the same
judge, cause your property to be placed in its former condition. Given on the
eighth of the Idesof November, during the Consulate of Gordian and Aviola, 240.
3. The Same to Dolentus.
There is no doubt that you have a right not only to bring suit for damages
under the Aquilian Law, but also to bring a criminal accusation against a
person who has rendered himself liable by having accused you of being
responsible for the death of your female slave.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Gordian,
Consul for the second time, and Pompeianus, 242.
4. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Zoilus.
According to the Aquilian Law, when anyone denies that he has committed
wrongful damage and he is convicted of having done so, he can be compelled to
pay double the amount.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof May, at Heraclea, during the Consulate
of the above-mentioned Emperors, 293.
5. The Same, and the Caesars, to Claudius.
You can bring suit under the Aquilian Law for double the damage which you have
sustained through your cattle having been unjustly shut up and killed, or
allowed to perish by hunger.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors, 293.
6. The Same, and the Caesars, to Plenius.
You are by no means prevented from bringing suit under the Aquilian Law, for
damages which you allege you have sustained on account of cattle having been
permitted to pasture on your land.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof November, under the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.
TITLE XXXVI. CONCERNING THE ACTION IN PARTITION.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Martian.
If the entire estate of your father has not been divided with the consent of
the heirs, and no decision has been rendered or compromise made with reference
to it, you can bring an action in partition for the division of the estate.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Lateranus
and Rufinus, 198.
2. The Emperor Antoninus to Vitianus.
If your wife, after the death of your father, to whom she had given her dowry,
and whose heir you have become, should still be united
with you in marriage, you will, in accordance with the provisions of the
ancient law, have the right to bring an action in partition against your co-
heirs for the purpose of obtaining the dowry, and you can retain it even if she
should die afterwards, provided she is still married to you.
Given on the second of the Idesof February ....
3. The Same to Rufus.
Bring suit against your co-heirs for partition, in accordance with the
prescribed legal formalities. If anything should be proved to have been taken
from your share of the estate, the judge appointed to hear the case, having
made proper investigation, shall render judgment in your favor, in accordance
with the rules of law. An action for the crime of plundering the estate will,
in vain, be brought by a co-heir, as he is considered to have been indemnified
by the action in partition.
4. The Emperor Alexander to Amonius.
If, while you were a son under paternal control, and movable property, or that
which can move itself, which might belong to castrense peculium,should be
donated to you by your father, you will be entitled to it as part of your
peculium castrense,which is not owned with your brothers; but the lands,
although they may all have been conveyed to you by your father while you were
in the army, will, nevertheless, not be included in your peculium
castrense.Those lands which are acquired by a son under paternal control on
account of his being in military service come under a different rule, as they
constitute part of the castrense peculium.
5. The Same to Statilia.
It was in your husband's power, in a fit of anger, to change the provisions
which he had made in his will with reference to his slaves, namely, that one of
them should remain in perpetual servitude, and that the other should be sold in
order to be taken away. Hence, if afterwards, his clemency should mitigate his
anger (which, although it may not be proved by documentary evidence, still,
nothing prevents its being established by other testimony, especially when the
subsequent meritorious conduct of the said slave is such that the wrath of the
master has been appeased), the arbitrator in the action in partition should
comply with the last wishes of the deceased.
6. The Emperor Gordian to the Soldier Pomponius.
Property consisting of claims is not capable of division, for, according to the
Twelve Tables, it is by operation of law divided into hereditary shares.
7. The Same to aelianus.
Where the demand for the execution of a trust arises among coheirs, the Praetor
or the Governor of the province, who has been appointed to decide the case, or
the judge who is to hear the action in
partition, shall exert himself to cause the will of the testatrix to be
observed.
8. The Same to Telesphorus.
You can obtain a division of any property whatsoever which is held in common by
you and your brother, and is derived from the estate of your father or mother,
when the judge decides the action in partition.
9. The Same to Verinus.
There is no doubt that proceedings in partition are included among bona
fideactions, and that your share of the estate (if you are entitled to any),
will be increased by the addition of the profits.
10. The Same to Telesphorus.
When a testator divides his estate among all his heirs, and orders each of them
to be content with certain lands, and the slaves which are attached to the
same, it is clear that his will should be obeyed, if the authority of the
Falcidian Law has not been violated; and when he thinks that all his slaves
should be recommended to his heirs, he does not by the words that follow change
the disposition which he had made of all of them, and his first division does
not become void, as he is considered to have made this statement with reference
to those to whom he had decided to leave the slaves by his will.
11. The Emperor Philip, and the Caesar Philip, to Antony.
It is an established rule of law that the estates of intestate persons should
be equally divided between the sons and daughters of the deceased.
12. The Emperors Gallienus and Valerian to Rufus.
The division made between you and your brother should not (as you allege), be
considered void, because it was not reduced to writing, as the certainty of the
transaction sufficiently establishes the validity of the division.
13. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Saturninus.
It is certain that the peculiaof children should, after the death of their
father, be placed with the remainder of the property of the estate in order to
be divided. Your brother and co-heir, however, who contracted obligations
during the lifetime of your father, who himself was ignorant of the fact,
cannot sue you and your other brother and co-heir, except in order to obtain
the amount from his peculium,for sidered to have made this statement with
reference to those to whom he made the contracts.
14. The Same to Hermianus.
If, in the suit for partition by which the estate of your father was equally
divided between your brother and yourself, nothing was specially agreed in case
of the eviction of the property adjudged to each
of you, that is to say that each one would assume liability for his share, the
Governor of the province shall, by means of the action praescriptis
verbis,compel your brother and co-heir to pay, in proportion to his share, any
damage which you may have sustained through the eviction of the property.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of the
above-named Emperors, 293.
15. The Same to Theophilus.
It has been decided that, when a division has been made by agreement of the
parties, and possession follows by common consent, and the entire ownership of
the property which was decided to belong to your father has been assured to
him, you will have the right to claim said property, if you succeed to his
estate. If, however, the division was based upon an ordinary agreement, the
arbitrator appointed to decide your action in partition shall determine how the
community of interest shall be apportioned among you.
16. The Same to Heraclius.
Children have no power to cause the will of their father to be set aside, if
they cannot prove that it is inofficious, but where some legal formality is
lacking in either the will or the codicil, and the deceased in certain
statements made by him, declared that it was his will, even though succession
on the ground of intestacy may have taken place, it is established by the
authority of the law that, in an action for partition, the judge must comply
with the will of the father, with the exception of the reserve prescribed by
the Decree of the Senate.
17. The Same, and the Caesars, to Commodianus.
It is perfectly certain that, where co-heirs make a division with one another,
the rights of one of them who is absent and is ignorant of the fact will not be
prejudiced, and he can retain the undivided share which belonged to him in the
beginning, to be deducted from all of the shares of the others, wherefore you
can recover your share, with the income, by an action in partition, without
apprehending any loss from the division previously made by the co-heirs.
Given on the seventh of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors, 293.
18. The Same, and the Caesars, to Domina.
It has frequently been stated in rescripts that any property which a father has
purchased in the name of the daughter shall be awarded to her by the arbiter in
a suit for partition, if no contrary intention of the deceased is proved to
have existed. Therefore, if you should become the heir of your father, and the
property which you allege was purchased by him in your name still remains
intact, you can avail yourself of the above-mentioned rescripts against your
sister in proceedings brought before the Governor of the province.
(1) There is no doubt that any expenses incurred by one of the co-heirs in good
faith, on account of an estate owned in common, should
be adjudged to him in an action in partition, or in one based on voluntary
agency.
Given on the seventeenth of the Kalendsof ..., during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors, 293.
19. The Same, and the Caesars, to Lisicratiis.
It is a positive rule of law that, in a case in partition, where any of the
heirs have appropriated any of the common property, or have caused it to
deteriorate, they must be responsible for it, and indemnify the other heirs for
the said property.
Given on the nineteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the above-mentioned
Consulate, 293.
20. The Same, and the Caesars, to Pactuela.
In the action in partition, the price of property owned in common and sold as
such by one of the heirs does not entirely belong to the vendor, but if the
price was paid, his co-heir can bring the action on mandate against him; or if
he ratified the sale, the action on the ground of voluntary agency will lie in
his favor. Where, however, one heir, having sold the property, withholds the
purchase-money, the hereditary shares of the others in the same can be
recovered.
21. The Same, and the Caesars, to Fortunatus.
Where, with the view to the future succession, a father divided his estate
among his heirs, in accordance with his intentions, and, in any way whatsoever
manifested his wishes with reference to the division among his heirs, the
arbitrator appointed for the partition of the estate shall see that the reserve
is made, as is done in the case of the Falcidian Law, and that a division of
any property which the father did not leave to anyone either generally or
specially takes place equally among the heirs and, in rendering his decision,
he shall always comply with the wishes of the father.
22. The Same, and the Caesars, to Dionysius.
When one of several heirs, without the consent of his co-heirs but through
mistake, retains possession of a slave owned in common, the others believing
that the slave belongs to him, he does not make the slave his own, as every
good title to the latter is lacking; but it is clear that each of his co-heirs
has a right to his hereditary share in said slave.
23. The Same, and the Caesars, to Hermogenus.
Although the action to which creditors are entitled against each heir to the
extent of his hereditary share of the estate cannot be changed by an agreement
for division, still, he who is bound by the agreement can be compelled to carry
it out under the terms of the stipulation, and in accordance with law, and
where no stipulation was entered into, he can be sued in an action praescriptis
verbis,if he is not proved to have violated his contract.
24. The Same, and the Caesars, to Socrates.
Atestator, by means of entreaties, implored his son to transfer conditionally
to his brothers and certain other persons a tract of land which he had in his
possession, and which formed a part of the estate; but, after the condition had
been fulfilled, the son retained his hereditary share of the land as his fourth
under the Falcidian Law, setting off against it what he had received from his
co-heirs as a loan. In case anything should be lacking to make up his fourth,
and, after deducting what was paid by the others for the said land any excess
over and above the said fourth should remain, he will be compelled to surrender
it.
Given on the fifth of the Nonesof January, during the abovementioned Consulate,
294.
25. The Same, and the Caesars, to Diodes.
If you should reject the estate of your grandfather, you cannot be forced to
relinquish to your brothers property which you have acquired by a donation, or
in any other way.
Given on the Idesof April, during the Consulate of Tuscus and Anolinus.
26. The Emperor Constantine to Bassus, Praetorian Prefect.
Where a will that has been begun but not completed, or a codicil, a father's
letter, or any other written instrument is found which disposes of property in
any way, or in any terms whatsoever, it should be executed only by the heirs
themselves, no matter to what degree of relationship they may belong, whether
they appear to be of the same degree, or have been emancipated, or are such as
the Praetor calls to the succession; and in the action in partition (although
the children may be called to an intestate succession), with the exception of
the amount reserved by the Decree of the Senate, the dispositions of the
deceased must be observed, even if they were not made in accordance with the
formalities prescribed by law.
When, however, in a will of this kind, the name of a person other than the
children above designated is found, it is certain that the will should be
considered void only with reference to the said person.
Given at Rome, during the second Consulate of Crispus and Constantine-Caesar,
321.
Extract from Novel 18, Chapter VII. Latin Text.
Provided there is attached to an instrument of this kind either the signature
of the father himself, or those of all the children among whom the partition
took place.
TITLE XXXVII.
CONCERNING THE DIVISION OF PROPERTY OWNED IN COMMON. 1. The Emperor Antoninus
to Lucan.
If your brother sold only the share of the land which belonged to him, the sale
cannot be revoked; but you must bring an action for the
division of common property against him who owns the property jointly with you,
and by this means you will obtain the entire tract of land, if you make a
higher offer to your joint-owner for his share than he offers to you for yours.
If, however, he should offer you more, you will take it and transfer your share
to him. When the division of the land can conveniently be made without causing
damage to anyone, you will acquire the part of it which may be adjudged to you.
The following rule, however, should be observed, namely, that, after issue has
once been joined, no one can alienate his share without the consent of all the
other joint-owners of the property.
Given at Rome, on the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Antoninus,
Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
2. The Emperor Alexander to the Soldier Avitus.
If it should be proved before the Governor of the province that your brother
gave in pledge certain vineyards owned by you in common, as he was unable to
encumber to his creditor your share in said vineyards, the Governor shall order
it to be restored to you, together with any crops which the creditor may have
gathered from the same. The Governor must also provide for the division of the
vineyards between you and your brother's creditor, and order him to deliver to
you the portion which he received from your brother, after having been paid the
price which he decides that your brother's share is worth; or he must order it
to be transferred to your brother's creditor after your share has been
appraised, and he has paid to you the amount of its valuation.
Given on the second of the Idesof September, during the Consulate of Alexander,
Consul for the second time, and Marcellus, 227.
3. The Same to Verecundianus.
The duty of the arbiter appointed for the purpose of dividing property between
you and your brother only has reference to such as is held in common by you and
him; for any part of said property which he has sold will be owned in common by
you and the purchaser, and you should ask for an arbiter for each one of them,
if you wish the joint-ownership of said property to be dissolved. When,
however, a tract of land is in such a place that it cannot conveniently be
divided between the joint-owners, then a certain portion shall be adjudged to
each one of them, after a just appraisement has taken place, and a mutual set-
off for the price shall be made between them, so that if one receives a share
of greater value he will be required to indemnify the other. Sometimes, even a
purchaser who is a stranger is allowed to bid on the property, especially where
one of the joint-owners acknowledges that his means are not sufficient to pay
more than the very small sum offered by one of the others.
Given on the fifth of the Nonesof May, during the Consulate of Julian and
Crispinus, 223.
4. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Consuls to Heroda.
If your sister, who is over twenty-five years of age, has divided property
owned in common by yourself and her, it is settled that the division will
stand, even though it is not proved to have been made either by written
documents or other evidence. Where, however, she is a minor, and the time
during which she is entitled to demand complete restitution has not yet
expired, the Governor of the province, after proper investigation, shall
determine whether complete restitution should be made on account of the
division. He shall also provide that division shall be made of any property
held in common by you, and shall require an account of the expenses to be
rendered (if either of you has incurred any with reference to the said
property), as well as an account of the profits, and of any fraud or negligence
which may have taken place (as there is no doubt that all these things should
be considered in an action brought for the division of property owned in
common), in order that equality may be maintained in everything.
Given on the eighth of the Idesof February, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
294.
5. The Same, and the Caesars, to Secundinus.
No one can against his will be compelled to retain his interest in the joint-
ownership of property, or a partnership, therefore, after application has been
made to the Governor of the province, he will provide for the partition of any
property which he may ascertain is held in common by you and your sister.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 294.
TITLE XXXVIII.
MATTERS WHICH APPLY TO BOTH THE ACTION IN PARTITION AND THAT FOR THE DIVISION
OF PROPERTY OWNED IN COMMON.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Marcus.
It has been decided that a division of land has the effect of a sale. Given on
the sixth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of Gentian and
Bassus, 212.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Euphrata.
Even if someone who had no right to do so has appointed an arbitrator to make a
division of property, still, if the partners gave their consent to such a
division, each one of them has obtained the ownership of the property of which
he acquired possession in accordance with the agreement.
Given on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of
Alexander, Consul for the third time, and Dio, 230.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Seva.
It is customary to come to the relief of persons who have attained their
majority, where divisions of property have been made through fraud or deceit,
or unjustly, and not as the result of a decision in court, because in bona
fidecontracts whatever is established to have been done unjustly shall be
corrected.
Given on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of the same
Emperors, 293.
4. The Same, and the Caesars, to Maximian.
If your paternal uncle, while transacting business for himself, purchased a
part of certain property owned in common, and did not thereby become a joint-
owner of all of it, measures must be taken to indemnify you for the share to
which you are entitled; and therefore it is contrary to the rules of law to
demand that he shall divide with you the ownership of what he purchased.
Given on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors; the first, Consul for the fourth time, and the
second, Consul for the third time, 293.
5. The Same, and the Caesars, to Frontinus and Gaferio.
With reference to the documents which you allege are jointly owned by your
brother and yourself, the Governor of the province, having been applied to,
shall determine with whom they should be deposited.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof February, during the abovementioned Consulate.
6. The Same, and the Caesars, to Thesidiana and Others.
If you made a division of property with your paternal uncle, under the
condition that he would swear that he had not been guilty of malicious fraud in
the transaction, and he does not comply with what he agreed to, nothing can
prevent you from claiming an undivided interest in the property which was the
subject of the agreement, and was included in the division.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
294.
7. The Same, and the Caesars, to Severianus and Flavianus.
If your brothers have encumbered their undivided interest in a tract of land
without your consent, and the land comes into your hands in accordance with the
contract for partition, without any mention having been made of the
encumbrance, and the shares which belonged to the other joint-owners before the
partition was made and to which the lien solely attached, are evicted, you can
bring the action praescriptis verbisagainst your brothers, under the
stipulation, if one was made; otherwise you can sue for the value of your
interest; for if you,
being aware of the lien on the land, accepted the ownership of the same, you
will not have the power to proceed against your brothers, unless you prove that
the guarantee against eviction was made by a formal statement, or promised by
an agreement.
Given at Nicomedia, on the second of the Nonesof December, during the Consulate
of the Caesars, 294.
8. The Same, and the Caesars, to Nicomacus and Others.
If a division of property owned in common, made by you after reaching the age
of twenty-five years, was perfected by the relinquishment or transfer of
possession, and this was done in good faith and by common consent, it cannot be
abrogated.
Given on the Nonesof December, during the Consulate of the Caesars, 294.
9. The Same, and the Caesars, to Demetrianus.
The action in partition, or the one for the division of property owned in
common, can only be brought while joint-ownership of the property exists.
Given at Nicomedia, on the sixth of the Idesof December, during the Consulate
of the Caesars, 294.
10. The Same, and the Caesars, to Gallicanus.
Where all the property to be divided is specifically stated in a written will,
nothing will prevent the heirs from demanding that any which the testator did
not mention be divided.
11. The Emperor Constantine to Caerulus.
The division of land should be made in such a way that slaves or serfs attached
to the soil may pass to each heir without being separated, so that the
relationship or affinity of those most closely connected may remain unimpaired;
for who can suffer children to be separated from their parents, sisters from
their brothers, and wives from their husbands? Therefore, if anyone should,
contrary to law, separate either slaves or serfs connected in this manner, he
shall be compelled to again unite them.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Proculus and
Paulinus, 334.
12. The Emperor Justinian to the Senate.
The following provisions have appeared to Us to be in perfect conformity to
justice. If anyone, having either signed or given an antenuptial donation in
behalf of his son, or a dowry in behalf of his daughter, provided that what he
gave may revert to him, either under the terms of a stipulation, or by the law,
or if someone else, having given a dowry or an ante-nuptial donation, in such a
way that the tenor of the stipulation or the force of the law will cause it to
come into the hands of the father, and he, having made a will, appoints either
his children or strangers his heirs, and makes no disposition whatever of the
property which has reverted to him, or come into his hands in this
manner, and other children of his are found who have obtained a part of their
father's property during his lifetime, either as an ante-nuptial donation or as
a dowry, or on account of service in the army, which (as long as a will
stands), they cannot be compelled to place in the mass of the estate, then the
son or daughter aforesaid shall have as his or her separate property whatever
reverted to their father or came into his hands, which shall be computed as any
other profit; so that, in the present instance, he or she will only be entitled
to as much as his or her brothers obtained from their father by the means which
We mentioned above, and they will not be compelled on account of the will to
place it in the general mass of the estate.
But where nothing was given by their father to any of their brothers, they
cannot claim this share for themselves, but it becomes, as it were, a part of
the paternal estate to be divided among all the heirs, in accordance with the
terms of the will, and this only applies where the distribution of the estate
of the father was made among the children. If, however, foreign heirs were
appointed, and nothing was stated by the testator in his will with reference to
this portion of his estate, then the son or the daughter will undoubtedly be
entitled to whatever reverted or came into their father's hands as a preferred
legacy. When what was given to the brothers was less than what came into the
father's hands in this way, an equal amount shall be reserved, and the balance
having become a part of the paternal inheritance, shall be divided in
accordance with the usual method of distributing estates.
It should undoubtedly be observed that, if the amount which the father received
from this source is less than that which he gave to his children, the whole of
it will belong to those on whose account the property reverts to the father.
Therefore, We desire that those rules which We have declared apply to the
father shall also be applicable to the grandfather, and the paternal or
maternal great-grandfather, as well as to the mother, the grandmother, and the
paternal or maternal great-grandmother.
Given at Constantinople, on the eleventh of the Kalendsof August, during the
fifth Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes, 550.
TITLE XXXIX. CONCERNING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF BOUNDARIES.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Nicephorus.
The owner of a tract of land cannot be prevented from selling a certain portion
of it after having removed the boundaries and retain- . ing the remainder. The
purchaser cannot claim a greater amount of land than that which came into his
hands in accordance with a contract of sale, under the pretext of certain
boundaries existing during the time preceding the sale.
Given at Nicomedia, on the Idesof December, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors, 293.
2. The Same, and the Caesars, to Tatian.
The difference of succession, and the consent of neighbors can, by either
adding to or taking from lands, frequently change the position of ancient
boundaries.
Given at Nicomedia, on the ninth of the Kalendsof January, under the Consulate
of the above-mentioned Emperors, 293.
3. The Emperor Constantine to Tertullian.
Where anyone first raises a question concerning the boundaries of his property,
and it has reference to the contest of the ownership of the same, the question
of possession must first be disposed of, and then the surveyor will be directed
to go to the place, so that the truth having been ascertained, the controversy
relating to the boundaries may be terminated. If, however, the other party
should absent himself, in order that this question may not be decided, the
surveyor shall, nevertheless, proceed to go to the place designated by the
Governor of the province, and take his measurements in the presence of the
adverse party.
Given at Verona, on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate
of Gallicanus and Symmachus, 230.
4. The Same to Bassus, Urban Prefect.
If it should be established that someone who raised a question as to a boundary
intended to seize the property of another before a decision had been rendered
in the case, he shall lose not only what he wrongfully claimed, but (that
everyone should be content with his own property and not desire that of
another), if he who is the aggressor, when demanding the land, should be
defeated in court, he shall lose as much land as he attempted to take from the
other party.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of
Gallicanus and Symmachus, 330.
5. The Emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius to Neoterius, Praetorian
Prefect.
The exception of five feet having been abolished, persons shall be free to
bring actions for the determination of the boundaries, or the ownership of
property of these dimensions.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Arcadius,
Consul for the second time, and Rufinus, 392.
6. The Emperors Theodosius, Arcadius, and Honorius, to Rufinus, Praetorian
Prefect.
For the purpose of finally disposing of all fraudulent schemes and
machinations, We decree that so far as the determination of boundaries is
concerned, not the prescription of long time, but only that of thirty years
shall be applicable.
Given on the second of the Nonesof November, during the Consulate of Arcadius,
Consul for the second time, and Rufinus, 392.
TITLE XL. CONCERNING PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE SAME CASE.
1. The Emperor Julian to Secundus, Praetorian Prefect.
All those exceptions having been abolished and rejected to which litigants were
accustomed to have recourse, under the pretext that other parties were
interested, in order to protract the decision of the case, permission is hereby
granted to any of them (whether all are under the same jurisdiction or reside
in different provinces), to bring the action or file the answer, without
requiring the presence of one or more of the others, who may be interested in
the suit.
Given on the third of the Nonesof September, during the Consulate of Mamertinus
and Nevita, 362.
2. The Emperors Valentinian and Valens to Sallust, Praetorian Prefect.
After an action has been properly begun, a matter in which several persons are
interested can proceed without a mandate, even where several of the parties are
absent, if those present are prepared to furnish security that they who are
absent will ratify what is done; or (if suit should be brought against them),
that they will furnish security that the judgment will be paid.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof December, during the Consulate of the Divine
Jovinian and Veronian, 364.
TITLE XLI. CONCERNING NOXAL ACTIONS.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Marcellus.
If the sum of money which you allege was stolen from the estate of your father
by a person who has proved to have been free, you will not be prevented from
bringing suit to recover it, or one to compel its production in court; for
while, in other instances, the damage follows the person, and a slave who has
been manumitted is liable in an action of theft, which does not lie in favor of
an heir, still, when a slave steals anything from his master, although he
commits a theft, the action of theft does not arise, nor can it be brought
against him, even after he has been manumitted, unless he continues to retain
possession of the stolen property after his liberation.
Given on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Maximus, Consul for the second time, and .aelianus, 224.
2. The Emperor Gordian to Quintilian and Others.
If your slaves, without your knowledge, or even against your express
prohibition, have secretly cut down trees, penalty for which is prescribed by
the law enacted with reference to forests, you need not apprehend that you will
be compelled to surrender the slaves, in addi-
tion to being liable for the damage sustained, for where masters are ignorant
of the crimes of their slaves, or have forbidden them to perform certain acts,
if they should be sued in a noxal action, judgment shall be rendered against
them to either surrender the slaves by way of compensation, or to retain them
under their control, after having satisfied the judgment for damages.
Given on the third of the Nonesof June, during the Consulate of Gordian and
Aviola, 240.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Eutychius.
If you are prepared to formally accuse a slave of kidnapping, you will not be
prevented from appearing before the Governor of the province; or, if you should
prefer to bring the noxal action, or that of theft against the master of the
said slave, the Governor of the province will take cognizance of your case; but
you are aware that if you should elect to sue the master, and cannot prove that
the crime was committed with his consent, which you attempted to do, he will
have the choice either of surrendering the slave by way of reparation to
indemnify you for the damage, or of paying the penalty.
Given on the fifth of the Nonesof October, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors, 295.
4. The Same, and the Caesars, to Sosius.
If a slave, without the knowledge of his master, or even if he is aware of it
but is unable to prevent it, takes away your property with violence, you can
bring suit for quadruple damages against his master before the Governor, if the
available year has not yet elapsed; and if it has elapsed, you can bring the
simple noxal action against him. When he prefers to surrender the slave by way
of reparation, you will still not be prevented from suing him for the amount
which came into his hands from the robbery; for if the act was committed with
his knowledge and he could have prevented it, he should, by all means, be
compelled to pay the amount of the judgment, without taking into consideration
the surrender of the slave. Where, however, you intend to bring an accusation
for public crime, on account of your wife having been carried away by a slave,
you should bring it not against the master, but against the slave who you
allege perpetrated the offence.
Given on the eighteenth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors, 299.
5. The Same, and the Caesars, to Menophilus.
Ifa slave, with the aid and advice of his master, has taken from you, by non-
manifest theft, a female slave and other property, as a civil action cannot
exist between a slave and a freeman, you can proceed against the master in a
penal action for double damages on account of this crime; and so far as the
other property is concerned, you can bring a real action to recover it or a
personal action for its value.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof April, during the above-mentioned
Consulate, 294.
TITLE XLII.
CONCERNING THE ACTION TO COMPEL THE PRODUCTION OP PROPERTY IN COURT.
1. The Emperor Alexander to the Soldier Crescens.
If the ownership of the female slave, with reference to whom you have brought
an action, belongs to your mother, she could not lawfully have been sold by
your father; and if you claim her for yourself, the Governor of the province
shall order her to be produced in order that the truth of the matter may be
judicially ascertained.
Given on the Kalendsof May, under the Consulate of Alexander,
227.
2. The Same to Cyrus.
Where a demand is made for a slave accused of some crime, the master should, by
means of the action for that purpose, be compelled to produce him in court.
Given on the eleventh of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Alexander, 227.
3. The Same to Felicissima.
If you have now the right to bring suit for the production of property, or the
one for its recovery, this cannot be contested on the ground that it has been
extinguished, because, some time previously, judgment was rendered against you
in an action for the production of property, since the present case is
different on account of the proceedings having been changed.
Given on the Kalendsof December, under the Consulate of Maximus, Consul for the
second time, and aelianus, 234.
4. The Same to Flacilla.
If you can prove that documents belonging to you are in the hands of the
adverse party, and the latter does not produce them, the judge will be aware
that you should be granted power to tender him the oath
in court.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate
of Agricola and Clementinus, 231.
5. The Emperor Gordian to the Soldier Sabinianus.
The opinion was very properly given by the jurist Modestinus, whose authority
should not be despised by you, that not only the party in possession is liable
to the action for the production of property in court, but also he who has been
guilty of fraud to avoid producing it.
Given on the second of the Idesof February, during the Consulate of Gordian and
Aviola, 240.
6. The Emperor Philip to Palemonides.
If, after a formal accusation has been made by you to the effect that the
adverse party has seized documents necessary to establish
your rights, and you bring a criminal action against him, you must prove the
truth of your allegations. When, however, you bring suit for the production of
the property in court, you will be obliged to proceed in the way which is
customary in such cases.
Given on the second of the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Peregrinus and
aemilianus, 245.
7. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars to Vitalianus.
Where anyone who is required to produce property in court has the power to do
so, but commits negligence or fraud in obeying the order, and then produces it
in a damaged condition, the equity of the proceeding demands that although an
action to compel the production cannot be brought, still, one in factumcan be
granted against him.
Given on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof June, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Acquilinus, 287.
8. The Same, and the Caesars, to Photinus.
If the person whom you mentioned in your petition has loaned or deposited your
property, you can bring either the action for its production, or the one for
its recovery against whomever has possession of the same. But if an agreement
was made that the property should be restored to you, and you have succeeded
him who deposited it, you cannot, on the ground of hereditary right, be
prevented from availing yourself of the action of deposit.
If, however, you have not title to the estate under either the civil or
praetorian law, understand that, strictly speaking, you have legally no right of
action based on the contract executed by him against whom you ask for relief,
but an equitable action of deposit will be granted you, in accordance with
justice.
Given at Heraclea, on the fifth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of
the above-mentioned Emperors, 293.
9. The Same, and the Caesars, to Faustinus.
If you prove that you have paid a legal debt to the person to whom it was due
under some contract, in the presence of the Governor of the province, he will
order your notes, under which nothing more can be claimed, and the instruments
evidencing the contract, to be produced and returned to you, as you have
naturally been released from liability.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors, 294.
TITLE XLIII.
CONCERNING GAMBLERS AND GAMES OP CHANCE. 1. The Emperor Justinian to John,
Praetorian Prefect.
The practice of games of chance is very ancient, and has been permitted to
soldiers when they were not otherwise occupied, but,
having been adopted by innumerable foreign nations, it has been the cause of
many tears, for persons who were not professional gamblers and did not
understand the game, playing day and night, lost all their property by staking
their money, their ornaments, their precious stones, and their gold. As the
result of this they are ordinarily led to blaspheme the name of God and curse
Him, and execute instruments.
Therefore, having in view the welfare of Our subjects, We decree by this
general law that no one shall be permitted to gamble either in public or
private houses, or other places, or to watch those who do; and if this law
should be violated no prosecution shall follow, but any amount which has been
paid shall be returned, and can be recovered by proper actions, either by the
person who paid it, or by their heirs --- even if they have neglected to demand
it --- or by their attorney or their parents; or, if they should fail to do so,
the Treasury can recover it by its representatives, notwithstanding the
prescription, unless it has run for fifty years.
The bishops of the different dioceses shall see that this law is executed, and
shall have the right to avail themselves of the aid of the Governors of
provinces, and they shall regulate the following five games, namely: comon-
belon, comon-diaulomolon, rhindalca, kayron,and ecperusan.We do not, however,
permit the stakes in these games to exceed one solidus,no matter how wealthy
the persons may be, and if anyone should happen to be beaten, he will not
sustain a serious loss, for We not only legally regulate wars, but also matters
connected with amusement.
We do not prescribe a penalty for those who violate this law, still, We grant
authority to bishops to make an investigation, and demand the aid of Governors
to enforce it; and We absolutely forbid the game called "wooden horses" to be
played, and if anyone should lose while engaged in it, he can recover what he
has lost, and the houses in which persons are found to be gambling in this
manner shall be confiscated. When the person who paid the money is unwilling to
have it refunded, Our Procurator shall claim it, and employ it for public
purposes. Judges shall likewise see that all persons abstain from blasphemy and
perjury (which, indeed, should be prevented by their authority).



TITLE XLIV.
CONCERNING RELIGIOUS PLACES, AND THE EXPENSES OF
FUNERALS.

1. The Emperor Antoninus to Dorita.
If the remains of your son should be threatened by the waters of a river, or
any other just and necessary cause should arise, you can transfer them to
another place, with the consent of the Governor of the province.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of
Antoninus, Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
2. The Same to Hilarianus.
When a dead body has been brought on land belonging to you, either against your
consent or without your knowledge, or a stone is placed there, this does not
make the place religious. If, however, anyone should bring a corpse upon your
land with your consent, the place will thereby become religious, as there is no
doubt that a monument cannot be erected, nor any place be rendered religious,
if the owner forbids this to be done.
Given on the Kalendsof May, under the Consulate of Acquilinus, Consul for the
second time, and Anulinus, 217.
3. The Emperor Alexander to Rimus.
The Governor of the province shall order that the legacy left you by the
deceased shall be paid, as well as what you can prove that you have expended
for the funeral, or for the deceased while he was ill, in accordance with the
judgment of a good citizen.
Given on the fifth of the Nonesof July, during the Consulate of Maximus, Consul
for the second time, and aelianus, 224.
4. The Same to Lucian.
If by the term "monument" you mean a sepulchre, you are informed that no one
can claim it by the right of ownership; but where it belongs to the family the
title to it will be vested in all the heirs, and in a partition it cannot be
allotted to any individual one. Profane places, however, which are near it, and
have always been connected with buildings intended for the use of men, will
belong to the person to whom the structures to which they appear to have been
attached are granted by the partition.
Given on the sixth of the Nonesof November, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and aelianus, 224.
5. The Same to the Soldier Cassius.
A father and a mother who are the heirs of their son, who was a soldier, should
not fail to comply with his will, in which he provided for the erection of a
monument to himself, for although all complaints on this ground have been
abolished by former constitutions, still, the parents cannot avoid experiencing
regret, and being conscious that they have neglected their duty by failing to
comply with the last will of the deceased.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Julian and
Crispinus, 225.
6. The Same to Primitivus and Others.
The inscriptions on monuments do not transfer to freedmen either the right of
sepulture, or the ownership of a place which is not religious; but you can take
advantage of prescription for a long time, if there was good ground for it in
the beginning.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Julian and
Crispinus, 225.
7. The Emperor Gordian to Claudius.
You are not forbidden to place statues upon a tomb, or to decorate with
ornaments a sepulchre which you allege that you have built, for everyone is
perfectly free to avail himself of his right, provided that he does not do
anything prohibited by law.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Gordian,
Consul for the second time, and Pompeianus, 242.
8. The Emperor Philip to Julia.
The right of sepulture in a family tomb does not extend to persons connected by
affinity, or to mere blood-relatives who have not been appointed heirs.
Given on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of
Peregrinus and aemilianus, 245.
9. The Same, and the Caesar Philip, to Faustina.
It is evident that a religious place should not be sold; but it is none the
less certain that a field which is not religious, and adjoins a monument, is
subject to the law as profane property, and hence can legally be alienated.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of Philip
and Titian, 246.
10. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Aquilina.
If the body was not permanently committed to the tomb, you will not be
prevented from removing it.
Given on the eighth of the Idesof February, during the Consulate of Diocletian,
Consul for the fourth time, and Maximian, Consul for the third time, 290.
11. The Same, and the Caesars, to Gaudentius.
We do not forbid criminals to be buried who have suffered the punishment that
they deserved.
Given on the eighth of the Idesof April, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors; the first, Consul for the fourth time, and the second,
Consul for the third time, 290.
12. The Same, and the Caesars, to Victorinus.
It was long since forbidden that the remains of deceased persons should be
buried inside a city, lest the sacred right of citizens might be defiled.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors; the first, Consul for the fourth time, and the second,
Consul for the third time, 290.
13. The Same, and the Caesars, to Dionysius.
.The family, as well as the hereditary right of sepulture, extends also to
foreign heirs. The family right, however, is vested in its mem-
bers, even if none of them is an heir, but it is enjoyed by no one else who is
not an heir.
Given on the third of the Idesof November, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
294.
14. The Emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius to Cynegius, Praetorian
Prefect,
No one can transfer a human corpse from one place to another without permission
of the Emperor.
Given at Constantinople, on the third of the Kalendsof March, during the
Consulate of the Noble Youth Honorius and Evodius, 386.
