
BOOK VII.


TITLE I.
CONCERNING FREEDOM GRANTED BY THE WAND
OP THE PRAETOR, AND MANUMISSION CONFERRED
IN THE COUNCIL.

1. The Emperor Antoninus to Tertius.
The condition of those who are manumitted in the Council, after the ground for
it has been approved by the court, and the manumission has taken place, is not
usually called in question, even when it is alleged that enfranchisement was
obtained by false representations.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Sallust.
It is perfectly certain that where Roman citizenship has once been granted, a
second manumission can neither add anything to, nor take anything from it.
Given on the day before the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.
3. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Attonita.There is no doubt that a woman
cannot legally manumit anyone either through her husband, or an agent, by means
of a wand.1
4. The Emperors Constantius to Maximus, Prsetorian Prefect.
A slave can obtain his freedom through the efforts of his patron in the
presence of Our Council, or before consuls, praters, presidents, governors, or
municipal magistrates, to whom this right has been conceded.
TITLE II. CONCERNING TESTAMENTARY MANUMISSION.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Primus.
It is certain that if anyone over twenty years of age should make a codicil,
leaving a slave his freedom, the date of confirmation will not prejudice the
manumission; for, in this instance, the intention of the deceased, and not his
legal capacity, must be considered.
2. The Same Emperors to Philetus.
Freedom cannot be granted by the will of a deceased person when the estate has
not been entered upon, or if the disposition of the property was set aside,
because of some crime which was not punished on account of death.
3. The Same Emperors to Euphrosinus.
Where freedom has been granted by the will of the deceased and the estate has
been entered upon, even though the appointed heir may have rejected it for the
purpose of obtaining complete restitution, this will, nevertheless, in no
respect interfere with the grant of freedom.
Ordered on the seventeenth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Aper
and Maximus, 208.
1 Manumission by vindicia,or festuca,a wand, or staff, ordinarily took place
before the Praetor, but could be effected by any other magistrate legally
authorized to grant it. The master brought the slave, whom he wished to
liberate, before the proper official --- an act which might be performed anywhere,
and did not, by any means, imply appearance before a judicial tribunal --- and
after having stated the reason for his emancipation, gave utterance to the
formula: "Hunc hominem liberum esse volo more quiritium,"whereupon the
magistrate placed the wand upon his head; he was then turned around either by
the lictor or his master, and the latter, after having given him a box on the
ear, sent him away.
Classic writers are greatly at variance in their accounts of this species of
manumission, which, of high antiquity, was probably changed in its order and
details from time to time. The use of the staff, and the box on the ear,
symbolical of the final castigation which could be inflicted upon the slave,
corresponds with the accolade of knighthood, indicative of the last blow which
the candidate could, consistently with his honor, tolerate. --- ED.
4. The Same Emperors to Archelaus.
Although your father obtained his freedom directly by will, and you were his
heir, still, you cannot be compelled to render accounts of any business which
he transacted while he remained in slavery, as he did not receive his freedom
upon that condition. Again, he to whom freedom has been bequeathed either
directly or under the terms of a trust, on condition that he would render his
accounts, cannot obtain his freedom before having submitted them and returned
any property which he may have abstracted with evil intent. If, however, having
rendered his accounts, he should not be found to be indebted to the estate, he
will obtain his freedom absolutely after the estate has been entered on.
Published on the Kalendsof December, during the second Consulate of Lsetus, and
Cerealis, 216.
5. The Emperor Alexander to Quintilicm.
A testamentary grant of freedom made for the purpose of defrauding creditors,
even though the heir of the debtor may be solvent, is not valid under the Lex
JElia Sentia.
6. The Emperor Gordian to Pisistratus.
If the estate of him, by whose will you say you were manumitted, has been
rejected by the heirs on account of its indebtedness, you do not unjustly
demand that the will of the testator shall be observed with reference to you,
for the purpose of protecting the interests of freedom, if you offer to satisfy
the creditors of the estate; especially as this has already been decreed by
that most learned Emperor, the Divine Marcus.
This rule shall also be observed in the case of strangers.
7. The Same Emperor to Justa.
You should not, against the wishes of your mother, bestow freedom upon a slave
whom she forbade to be liberated, lest you may appear to have violated the
rights of filial affection.
8. The Emperor Philip and the C&sar Philip to Tremellius.
When a testator has ordered that freedom shall be granted to a certain slave,
at the time of the marriage of his son or daughter, he did not definitely fix
the date of his liberation from servitude, but he merely made it conditional,
so that if the marriage did not take place, freedom could not legally be
demanded by the slave.
9. The Emperors Cams, Carinus, and Numeriamis to Maurus.
The deceased could not directly bestow freedom upon your slave, although it is
stated that he appointed you his heir; for no one can, in accordance with law,
grant freedom directly to the slaves of others.
10. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian and the Caesars to Germans.
When freedom is legally granted in direct terms to slaves, not only by the
imposition of the cap of liberty,1 but also by acceptance of the estate, such
slaves become freedmen under the wills of their masters if no legal impediment
exists.
11. The Same Emperors and Csssars to Laurina.
If a will is void in law, any grants of freedom bestowed under it will not be
considered properly made, even if, as you allege, it was not added that the
instrument should be valid as a codicil.
12. The Same Emperors and Csssars to Rhysus.
If the heirs appointed under a will, which was legally executed, enter upon the
estate with the usual formalities, you cannot be deprived of the freedom to
which you were entitled under said will, if the appointed heirs, acting in
collusion with those who claim the estate on the ground of intestacy, should
refuse to accept it. Where, however, they voluntarily reject the estate left to
them, everything included in the will is considered to be of no effect.
If, however, the Governor of the province should ascertain that the heirs are
in collusion for the purpose of defrauding you of your freedom, he will provide
for your obtaining it, in accordance with the Constitution promulgated by the
Divine Pius Antoninus.
13. The Same Emperors and Csssars to Martial.
It is certain that where freedom has been left to a slave conditionally, he
cannot be deprived of it by the heir, nor can either alienation or usucaption
injure a slave who is to be conditionally free, as long as he will be entitled
to his liberty if the condition is complied with.
14. The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian to Florentine, Prse-torian Prefect.
Direct grants of freedom can be made by wills drawn up in the Greek language,
so that such grants, when made directly, shall be considered of the same force
as if the testator had ordered them to be stated in the terms prescribed by
law.
1 The pileus,or Phrygian cap, made of felt, with the top fashioned to represent
the circumcised phallus, and adopted by the Romans as the symbol of liberty,
has survived to the present day --- a singular and instructive memento of the
association, in ancient times, of the worship of the generative principles with
the exercise of the priceless right of freedom. It was worn by the
Carthaginians as well as the Romans, and is now a conspicuous portion of the
attire of the Tunisian Jewess. The peasantry of many nations of Europe have
retained it through all the vicissitudes and revolutions of centuries; and its
phellic appendage, conspicuously displayed on the coinage of the United States,
is delineated with a remarkable accuracy, which, although presumably
unconscious, leaves no doubt whatever as to its original significance. --- ED.
15. The Emperor Justinian to John, Praetorian Prefect.
As a Constitution of the Divine Marcus declares that where anyone either makes
a will or dies without doing so, thus furnishing ground for an intestate
succession, and bequeathes grants of freedom, and no one desires to accept the
estate of the deceased because there is reason to suspect it of being
insolvent, and the grants of freedom have been left under a trust, without
having been reduced to writing, any stranger whosoever, or any one of the
slaves to whom freedom has been left and whose status is in danger, can enter
upon the estate, on condition of giving security that he will satisfy all the
creditors, and confer freedom upon those whom the testator intended should
receive it.
Various doubts have arisen with reference to the interpretation of this
constitution, for if the property of the estate should be sold because no heir
could be found, it was asked whether, after the sale of the said property, it
would be possible for either a slave, or anyone else to accept the estate,
recover from the purchasers what had been sold, execute the grants of freedom,
and satisfy the creditors? Although the Divine Severus did not permit this to
be done after the property had once been disposed of, still We have adopted the
opinion of Ulpianus (especially with reference to the grants of freedom, in
order that they may not be lost) who held that, after the sale of the property,
a remedy would be afforded by the Constitution of the Divine Marcus within a
year; provided all the creditors were paid during that time, and the purchasers
suffered no other inconvenience by submitting to the rescission of the sale
before the aforesaid period had elapsed. Hence the slave who was entitled to
his liberty, or any stranger, will be permitted to enter upon the estate,
either before the sale or afterwards, within the term of a year, and recover
the property, having first furnished security that the grants of freedom will
be carried out, and the creditors satisfied.
(1) Moreover, if anyone, having entered upon an estate, should promise to carry
out all grants of freedom, and to pay the creditors not in full, but only in
part, and the latter accept this proposal, We decree that, in a case of this
kind, the Constitution of the Most Wise Emperor aforesaid shall be applicable,
and We hold that it should by all means be adopted, especially when the
creditors consent, but when they are unwilling, We do not permit any such
agreement to take effect.
(2) Where, however, some of the slaves are willing to accept freedom and others
think that it should be rejected, in this instance, the Rescript of the Divine
Marcus will apply, and there is no doubt that in this case the petitioner for
freedom should be heard, and the slaves have perfect liberty to decide whether
they prefer to be free or to remain in servitude. For while no slave is allowed
to refuse Roman citizenship, still, in this instance, lest through the
ingratitude of some the others may remain in bondage, all slaves who desire to
obtain their freedom shall be permitted to do so; and if any of them are
unwilling, or reject it, they shall be immediately reduced to servitude,
and those who would not accept a patron will obtain a master, and perhaps a
severe one.
(3) When, however, the person who accepts the estate does not promise to carry
out all the grants of freedom, but only to liberate a certain number of slaves
whose manumission was provided for, if the property of the estate is sufficient
for the payment of the creditors in full, the better course will be for all the
slaves to receive their freedom, even though this may not have been promised.
But when there are not enough assets to settle the claims of the creditors, it
is more advantageous for only a few of the slaves to be emancipated.
(4) In this way We have found a remedy for the doubts of the ancients, by
adding an excellent provision to the constitution aforesaid; and hence We order
that if no single claimant of the estate appears, but several do, and two or
more appear at the same time, all of them shall be given permission to enter on
the estate, all having previously furnished security that they will satisfy the
creditors, and carry out the grants of freedom.
But if they should appear at different times, the one who comes first shall
take precedence, if he can give security; but if he is unable to do so, the
others shall be entitled to the privilege in their order, according to the time
when they make the demand; and this must be done within a year.
(5) Where one of the applicants promises to free certain slaves, but not all,
and another is prepared to furnish security that all the creditors will be
satisfied, and all grants of freedom be carried into effect, it will be
perfectly just for the latter to be accepted, so that all the grants of freedom
without distinction may be executed. We grant this favor not only to a slave to
whom freedom was bequeathed, but also to him to whom it was not left by will;
so that the result may be commendable, and others receive their freedom by
means of one to whom it was not left by will.
(6) If, however, anyone should first receive the property of the estate and his
liberty, We decree that the preceding provision shall apply to the second or
the third claimant, or to any others who promise more generous donations of
freedom. But when the slave who was the first to demand the inheritance has
already received it, and freedom has been conferred by him upon certain other
slaves belonging to the estate, and some slave forming part of the same, or a
stranger who is free, appears and offers better terms, he shall be permitted to
take the estate, if he promises to do more, and gives proper security. The
first applicant shall, however, retain his freedom, even though the property
may have been sold by him, and all these things must take place within a year
from the time when the first claimant presented himself, in accordance with
what has already been stated.
TITLE III. CONCERNING THE ABOLITION OF THE LEX FUSIA CANINIA.
1. The Emperor Justinian to Henna, Praetorian Prefect.
We decree that where grants of freedom are left to slaves by will, whether this
is done directly, or under the terms of a trust, they shall be valid without
distinction, just as where freedom is bestowed by the acts of persons who are
living.
The Lex Fusia Caniniashall not apply to other cases, and no impediment shall be
placed in the way of testators who desire to exercise their beneficence by the
emancipation of their slaves.
TITLE IV. CONCERNING GRANTS OF FREEDOM BY MEANS OF TRUSTS.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Primus.
As you allege that the estate of the testator, by whom freedom was bequeathed
to you by the terms of a trust, was not entered upon, and another heir than the
one appointed obtained possession of the estate on the ground of intestacy, if
you do not demand the freedom which was granted you under the trust, with the
execution of which the heir 'at law was charged, you can not legally demand it
from him who was not requested by the testator to bestow it. It is clear that
if you can prove that the appointed heir neglected to give you your freedom,
after having received money for doing so, the heir at law can be compelled to
grant it to you.
Published on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of
Lateranus and Rufinus, 198.
2. The Emperor Antoninus to Valerius.
Although the codicil by which it appears that you were bequeathed to the uncle
of the deceased has been declared forged, still, if you obtained your freedom
from the legatee in a proper manner, before any question arose with reference
to the crime, what happened afterwards will not invalidate the grant of freedom
made in this way. According to the Constitution of the Divine Hadrian, it is
evident that the heir will have the right to demand the twenty aurei.
3. The Emperor Alexander to Lucius.
As you allege that freedom was conditionally granted to the female slaves, why
should there be any doubt that children who came into the world before this was
done were born slaves, and became the property of the heirs by the right of
ownership? For relief should only be granted to those who were born after he
who was charged with the grant of freedom was in default, in order that they
may appear to have been born free.
4. The Same Emperor to Julianus.
Where a female slave, to whom freedom was left under a trust by the will of her
master, has received her liberty, she, having become
a Roman citizen in accordance with the Decree of the Senate, and the
constitutions promulgated with reference thereto, her children will be
freeborn. If, however, she has never claimed her freedom, she should only blame
herself if the children born to her in the meantime are slaves.
5. The Same Emperors to Dionysius.
A minor of twenty years of age cannot, by his last will, bequeath freedom under
a trust to his slave, unless he is able to prove that he was legally authorized
to do so.
6. The Same Emperor to Maximus.
It has been decided that freedom granted under the terms of a trust should be
given to a female slave, nor will she be the less entitled to it, if, in the
meantime, her mistress was unwilling to sell her, provided she received nothing
from the will of the person who bequeathed the freedom, for the reason that she
might be liberated in the course of time, whenever an opportunity to purchase
the slave might arise.
7. The Same Emperor to Nicomedes.
Slaves, to whom freedom has been granted under a trust by the last will of the
testator, become the freedmen of those who have been charged with their
manumission.
Published on the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Fus-cus and Dexter,
226.
8. The Same Emperor to Eutyches.
As you state that freedom was granted you by a trust, on condition that the
widow of the testator agreed to it, even though she did not enter upon the
estate, and all of it, in consequence, passed to his son, if he manifests no
opposition, you can demand your freedom.
9. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to Daphnis.
Even if a testator, when he appointed his slave the guardian of his children,
did not, at the same time, grant him his freedom, it will be considered that he
manumitted him under the terms of a trust, and that this was done for the sake
of liberty and in behalf of the wards. If he had appointed not his own slaves
but those belonging to another, being at the same time aware of his condition,
it was held by jurists that he likewise would be entitled to his freedom as
under a trust, unless it clearly appeared that the intention of the deceased
was otherwise.
10. The Same Emperors to Mercurialis.
You will still be entitled to the grant of freedom left you by the terms of the
trust, subject to the condition that you shall receive it when the testator's
son attained his twenty-fifth year, even though, as you allege, the heir should
have died before reaching the designated
age. For it was held by the ancients that the hope of freedom should not be
destroyed after the time had elapsed when, if the son of the testator had
lived, he would have attained the prescribed age.
11. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Flavianus.
If you were a slave, and freedom was bequeathed you under the terms of a trust,
you are hereby notified that you cannot obtain your liberty without
manumission. Hence if, while a slave, you obtained a fiduciary grant of
freedom, you must appear before the Governor of the province, so that, after
having investigated your case, he may decide whether or not you have the right
to be set free, and may compel him to manumit you, whose duty it is to do so;
or, if the latter conceals himself he can, by means of a decree, protect your
interests against the person who cannot be found.
12. The Same Emperors and Cassava to Hyrenius.
It is stated by legal authority that freedom under a trust shall not be
considered as bequeathed, on account of the insertion of the phrase, "I
recommend," into a will or codicil.
13. The Same Emperors and Consuls to Pythagorida.
If the testator, having before his marriage given you to his future wife,
afterwards left her a legacy, and by his will or codicil charged his heirs to
manumit you, there is no doubt that they, as well as she, by accepting the
legacy bequeathed to her, approved the will of the deceased, and will be
liable, and that you will be entitled to your freedom under the terms of the
trust.
14. The Emperor Justinian to Julianus, Prsetorian Prefect.
As a doubt arose among the ancients whether it was possible for freedom to be
left under the terms of a trust to a slave who was, as yet, unborn, and was
expected to be a boy, We, for the purpose of settling this dispute, order that,
in favor of freedom, both the grant of it under a trust, as well as one made
directly, shall be valid, whether the unborn child is male or female, as only
the question of freedom is considered, even if the mother who brought him forth
still remained in slavery.
If, however, several children of different sexes were born at the same time,
and only one or more were mentioned, all of them will be entitled to their
freedom as soon as they are born; as it is better, in case of doubt, to adopt
the more humane opinion, and especially where liberty is concerned.
Given on the Kalendsof October, during the fifth Consulate of Lampadius and
Orestes, 530.
15. The Same Emperor to Julianus, Prsetorian Prefect.
We decree that when freedom has been bequeathed to a male or female slave under
a trust, and the debtor is in default in granting it,
the slave shall be liberated from servitude by a decision of the Governor,
without any act of the heir, or without waiting for his consent. Such a slave
shall be entitled to his or her freedom, just as if he or she had obtained it
directly from the testator himself, as it is wicked as well as absurd for heirs
to delay to carry out the wishes of the testator, especially where liberty is
involved.
16. The Same Emperor to Julianus, Prsetorian Prefect.
If a testator, in his will, should charge his heir to grant freedom to any one
of the children of his female slave, whom he designated by name, and the said
slave brought forth one or more children, and the heir did not, during his
lifetime, grant freedom to any of them, or, while deliberating which one he
would set free, died; a doubt arose among the ancient authorities whether all,
one, or none of the said children would be entitled to be free.
We, desiring to punish the evil intention of the heir for not complying with
the wishes of the testator, and for not selecting one of the children of the
female slave and giving it its freedom when he was able to do so, do hereby
decree that not only he, but also his heirs and successors, shall be compelled
to liberate all the children of the said female slave; for this is not contrary
to the intention of the testator, since, when he provided that any of said
children whom the heir might select would be free, he did not have in mind any
certain one, but all of them; and if the heir did not comply with his wishes,
there is no doubt that, according to the intention of the testator, all of them
would be entitled to their freedom.
We order that the same rule shall apply when the testator charged not the heir,
but a legatee or beneficiary of a trust, with the grant of freedom, so that,
for this reason, heirs, legatees, or beneficiaries of trusts, being actuated by
a just fear, may carry out the will of the testator, and may not themselves
suffer loss by being compelled to liberate all the slaves.
Any complaints they make shall be to no purpose, for they can only blame
themselves for the loss which is not due to Our legislation, but is the result
of their own contumacy.
Given at Constantinople, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof December, during the
Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes, 530.
17. The Same Emperor to Julianus, Prsetorian Prefect.
Where anyone has bequeathed his slave under the condition that the legatee
should grant him his freedom, and the heir, acting dishonorably with reference
to the legacy, refused to surrender the slave to the legatee, and suit having
been brought against him, and the judge having ordered him not only to give up
the slave, but also to pay his appraised value, the ancient interpreters of the
law were in doubt whether an obstacle was not placed in the way of freedom by a
decision of this kind; and when it was decided that freedom must be granted,
whether this should be done by the heir or the legatee, and if the heir granted
it, whether the legatee would be entitled to retain
the amount which he had received as a pecuniary fine, either entirely,
partially, or not at all.
We, in disposing of this controversy, are surprised to learn that the judge,
who had jurisdiction of the case aforesaid, did not require the heir not to
surrender the slave but only to pay his value, as such a fault offers an
occasion for a dispute. Wherefore, if such a question should arise, We think
that no judge would be so foolish as to render a decision of this description.
If, however, the legatee should demand that the slave be delivered to him, and
the term of two months should elapse after issue had been joined in the case,
We decree that the slave shall immediately obtain his liberty and become free,
and that the heir, on account of his evil behaviour, shall be condemned to pay
four times the amount of court costs incurred by the legatee, and that the
right of patronage shall be preserved unimpaired for the benefit of the latter.
TITLE V.
CONCERNING THE ANNULMENT OF CONDITIONAL GRANTS OF FREEDOM.
1. The Same Emperor to Julianus, Prsetorian Prefect.
Those known as dediticiishall not hereafter, under any circumstances, be
permitted to interfere with the administration of Our government, for the
reason that We find this term has fallen into disuse, and that the freedom
obtained by the aforesaid class exists only in name; for We, who endeavor to
cultivate the truth, only desire those things to appear in Our laws which can
actually become operative.1
Given during the Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes.
1 There were three kinds of manumissions originally recognized by the Roman
polity: the testamentary, or that conferred by will; that by enrollment in the
census; and that obtained by means of the vindicia,in the exercise of
magisterial authority. All of these were accompanied with certain essential
formalities which, if omitted, prevented the peregrinus,or "foreigner," from
acquiring the full rights of citizenship, and rendered him liable to be
assigned to one of the two inferior classes of freedmen.
When the requirements of the law had been strictly complied with, the
emancipated slave was entitled to all the privileges of a Roman citizen,
subject, however, to the obligations of patronage due to his former master, or
the heir of the latter, in case he chose to enforce them.
The Latini Juniani,whose status was comparable to that of the allies of the
Romans, composed the second grade of liberti.Certain disabilities attached to
their civil condition, which might be removed, either by a repetition of the
act of manumission, with its prescribed requisites, by a former master, or by
the indulgence of the sovereign.
The lowest in rank of all freedmen were the dedititii,whose position was that
of prisoners of war (from whom their name was derived), who had surrendered
unconditionally, and therefore were considered to be at the absolute disposal
of their captors. Where a slave had been subjected to torture, branded,
imprisoned, chained, assigned to a school of gladiators, condemned to fight
with wild beasts
TITLE VI.
CONCERNING THE ABOLITION OF LATIN FREEDOM, AND
ITS TRANSFERENCE IN CERTAIN WAYS TO THE ENTIRE
BODY OF ROMAN CITIZENS.
1. The Emperor Justinian to John, Prtetorian Prefect.As the class of dedititian
freedmen, having already been abolished, the freedom of the Latins, for this
reason, becomes in some respects unstable, and though to a certain extent
identified with the former, whatever remained that was available We have
confirmed as law. For as Latin freedom, like that originally introduced into
the ancient Latin colonies, resulted only in civil war, it would be absurd for
its appearance to remain when the thing itself was abolished.
Therefore, as the condition of freedom was obtained by the Latins in almost
innumerable ways, and different laws and decrees of the Senate were enacted
with reference to the same, and in the application of these the greatest
difficulties arose from the Lex Junia,the Largian Decree of the Senate, and the
Edict of the Divine Trajan, of which Our laws are full, for they were
introduced before any experience had been acquired in matters of this kind.
Hence it appears to Us perfectly proper to remove all these difficulties,
abolish Latin freedom, and having selected other methods different from those
by which Latin freedom was formerly acquired, give authority, at the present
time, to such persons to obtain the status of Roman citizens, so that all the
rules enumerated in the present law, which have originated in Roman States, and
all the other ways by which the name of Latins was acquired shall be absolutely
abolished, and shall not create Latin citizens, but shall be considered void.
For who will tolerate a condition by which, at the time of his death, freedom
and slavery can exist at once in the same person, and that he who lived as free
may die in
servitude ?
(1) Therefore, We order that if anyone should desire to grant his slave freedom
by means of a letter he can do so, provided he signs it himself, in the
presence of five witnesses called together for that
in the arena, or been guilty of conduct which rendered him infamous, he was
debarred from Roman citizenship, even though properly manumitted, and became a
dedititius.This disqualification was permanent and irrevocable, but did not
affect his children, whose status was that of their father before his behavior
had rendered him the object of public censure. A servile violator of the law,
when emancipated, did not obtain his freedom, but, from being a private, became
at once
a public slave.
The dedititiuswas prohibited from making a testamentary disposition of his
estate, which by operation of law, at his death, vested in his patron. He could
not live within a hundred miles of Rome, a violation of this rule entailing his
re-enslavement, and the confiscation of his property.
Modification of the restrictions imposed upon libertiwere introduced by
different emperors, but it was reserved for Justinian to entirely abolish the
distinctions which characterized the various orders of persons liberated from
bondage, and to divide the Romans into only two classes, freemen and
slaves. --- ED.
purpose; or when the letter, written in his own hand, discloses the permanency
of his intention. If he, having either drawn up the instrument himself, or
having had it done by a notary, should state therein that his slave was
entitled to his freedom, as in the case of a codicil, he may, even during the
lifetime of his patron, enjoy liberty and the rights of Roman citizenship.
(2) When anyone desires to liberate his slave in the presence of friends, he
shall be permitted to do so in the same way that he could perform such an act
after having called together five witnesses, provided he announces that he
wishes his slave to be free, where this is done in writing, and attested by the
signatures of the witnesses, and the person granting the manumission; and if it
is made before a public official, it must also bear his signature as well as
that of the witnesses.
Slaves who obtain their freedom in this manner become Roman citizens, just as
if they had obtained it by virtue of a codicil.
(3) We know that, in ancient times, under an Edict of the Divine Claudius, if
anyone ejected his slave publicly from his house when he was suffering from a
dangerous illness, and did not aid him in any way, or commit him to the charge
of others when he himself was unable to take care of him, or place him in a
hospital, or provide for him in some other manner, the said slave would
formerly enjoy Latin freedom, and if his master should die before he did, he
would, with his property, belong to his successor.
A slave of this kind shall hereafter become absolutely free, even against the
consent of his master, and, having been given his property, he shall
immediately become a Roman citizen, nor shall any of the rights of patronage be
enjoyed by his former owner, for he who publicly drove him away from his house
and family, without either assisting him, recommending him to the mercy of
others, placing him in a hospital, or even paying him ordinary wages, shall be
deprived of the ownership of the said slave, not only during the entire
lifetime of the said freedman, but also at the time of his death, as well as
afterwards.
(4) In like manner, if anyone should alienate his female slave on condition
that she would not prostitute herself, and her new master, through the infamous
desire of gain, should attempt to compel her to do so, or if her former master
should, by the imposition of his hands, make a reservation for himself when
alienating her, and she having been returned to him, cause her to prostitute
herself, she will immediately obtain the privileges of a Roman citizen, and he
who prostituted her will be excluded from all the rights of patronage, for is
anyone so degenerate and wicked as to pursue such a calling worthy to have
either a female slave or a freedwoman?
(5) Slaves who have received the cap of liberty by virtue of the last will of
the testator, and the consent of the heir, immediately become Roman citizens,
and have the right to march first in the funeral procession, and to stand by
the bed on which the body of their master has been laid.
No one shall be permitted to make a display of vain liberality, so that the
people may praise the deceased for his humanity, when they see a great number
of such slaves in the funeral procession wearing the liberty cap, for they will
all be deceived, as the slaves remain in their former servile condition, and
the evidence given in public shall ggoofor naught. When any such slaves become
Roman citizens, the right to patronage is reserved unimpaired for the benefit
of their
patrons.
(6) It should undoubtedly be observed that, when anyone manumits a slave either
by his will or under the wand of the Praetor, although he may say or write that
he wishes the slave to enjoy Latin freedom, the superfluous addition of "Latin"
shall be abolished, and he shall become a Roman citizen, lest the methods by
which men were formerly invested with citizenship may seem to have been
annulled by the wills of private persons.
(7) But if anyone should bequeath freedom to his slave conditionally, and while
the condition was still pending, a foreign heir should grant him his freedom,
he will become a Roman citizen, and not a Latin one as in former times. When
the condition is not complied with, the slave shall remain the freedman of the
heir who liberated him.
If, however, the condition should be fulfilled, anyone manumitted by will shall
be considered a freedman of the deceased, in order that children and cognates
may not be deprived of the rights of patronage, and that he who was entitled to
those rights by law may enjoy
them.
(8) The opinion held by the ancients seems to Us to be very harsh, that is to
say, where a slave has been defeated by his master in a suit brought to declare
him free, and his value was afterwards paid by someone to his master, but he
still remained subject to Latin law; for how can it be reasonable for his
master to receive the price of the slave, and at the time of the death of the
latter, again reduce him to slavery, since these two things are not consistent?
In the present instance, the slave will be entitled to Roman freedom, but the
rights of patronage will continue to be enjoyed by his master, for the reason
that the slave himself is, to a certain extent, his freedman.
(9) Where, however, anyone gives his female slave in marriage to' a freeman,
and provides her with a dowry, which is only customary in the case of those who
are free, the said female slave becomes a Roman citizen, and not a Latin one.
But if this is done, which very frequently takes place among Roman citizens,
and especially where they are noble, that is to say, where a dotal instrument
is drawn up and delivered to a person of this kind, such an instrument will
necessarily take effect, and the slave will become a Roman citizen.
(10) In like manner, if a master in a public instrument refers to a certain
slave as his son, his statement must be believed so far as the free condition
of the former is concerned; for if he was inspired with such an affection for
his slave that he did not consider him unworthy to be mentioned as his son, and
he did not do this
secretly, or only among friends, but in a public document, just as he would
have done so in court, how can the slave again be reduced to servitude at the
time of his death? He must, however, become a Roman citizen, receive absolute
freedom, and not depend upon a false statement of his master.
(11) Again, the most recent manner of changing Latin into Roman citizenship
should be adopted, namely, the instrument by which the condition of the slave
was established shall either be given to him or destroyed. But in order that no
opportunity may be afforded to slaves to steal it, and obtain their freedom by
their own wicked act, this manner of enfranchisement must be proved by certain
and undoubted evidence, and the owner of the slave must either give the
instrument to his slave in the presence of not less than five witnesses, or
tear or destroy it in some other way. Hence, to enable the slave to acquire
Roman citizenship, We decree that one who obtains his freedom in this way
shall, in this instance, as well as in others, be subject to the rights of
patronage, except where We have expressly denied these rights to patrons.
(12) With the exception of these cases alone, which have been selected from the
entire body of ancient jurisprudence relating to Latin citizenship, all the
other methods enumerated either in the books of jurists, or in the Imperial
Constitutions, are absolutely abolished ; and slaves shall not become Latin
citizens by their means, but, as has already been stated, shall remain in their
former condition, and shall not be permitted to profit by this remedy.
And, in order that hereafter no enactment with reference to Latin freedom may
conflict with Our Laws, the Lex Juniais hereby repealed, the Largian Decree of
the Senate shall no longer be operative, and the Edict of the Divine Trajan,
which follows, shall be of no force or effect, and if any other law, or Decree
of the Senate, or even an Imperial Constitution should treat of Latin
manumission, it shall be void, so far as this subject is concerned, and notice
is hereby given that, instead of the three kinds of freedom which formerly
existed, and which were the cause of much ambiguity, but one direct method
shall prevail.
If any law or constitution should hereafter make mention of freedom, it shall
be understood to be that conferred by Roman citizenship, and not Latin freedom.
(13) Where, however, Latin freedmen are dead, and their property, as such, has
passed to those.entitled to the same, or if they are still living, no
innovations shall be made by the provisions of this law, but the title to the
property shall vest to the persons aforesaid, and shall remain firm and
indisputable.
The present constitution shall only be applicable to freedmen in the future.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof November, after the fifth Consulate
of Lampadius and Orestes.
TITLE VII.
CONCERNING THE MANUMISSION OF A SLAVE OWNED IN COMMON.
1. The Emperor Justinian to Julianus, Prxtorian Prefect.
With reference to slaves owned in common and their freedom, and whether the
share of the person who gave them liberty accrued to the other master, or not,
and especially among soldiers, when they grant freedom in this way, much doubt
arose among the ancient legal authorities ; and a constitution is cited in the
Commentary of Martian on the Constitutions of the Divine Severus, by whose
terms this Emperor imposed the necessity upon the heirs of a soldier to
purchase the share of the other joint-owner, and give the slave his freedom.
Another constitution, however, promulgated by the Emperors Severus and
Antoninus, has been found, by which one partner is generally required to sell
his share to the other.
When freedom is granted to a slave, even though no benefit may accrue from the
estate of the dead partner to the other, and the price is required to be fixed
by the decision of the Praetor in accordance with what Ulpian, in the Sixth
Book on Trusts, and Paulus in the Third Book on the same subject, say, where it
is stated that Sextus ^lius, one of the ancient jurists, also held that the
other partner could be compelled by the Praetor to sell his share, in order
that the slave might become free, this Marcellus also notes in his work on the
Digest of Julianus, and it is clear that he in his commentary on Julianus only
adopted the opinion of the latter.
(1) Hence, these matters having been found in the works of the ancient legal
authorities, We, desiring to dispose of all such disputes, do order that,
generally speaking, no distinction shall be made between slaves owned in common
by soldiers or private persons, but in the case of all slaves who are common
property, where anyone desires to give them lawful freedom, either while alive
or by his last will, he can do so, and the other joint-owner shall be required
to sell his share of the slave, whether this be half, a third, or any other
portion whatsoever.
When there are several joint-owners, and one of them desires to liberate the
slave, all the others shall be compelled to sell the shares which they have in
said slave to the one who wishes to manumit him, or to his heir, even though
the common slave himself may have been appointed the heir of his master, and he
only made the appointment immediately before his death, in order that he who
purchased the shares of the other joint-owners, or his heirs, might liberate
the slave.
(2) If, however, the joint-owner or joint-owners refuse to accept the price, We
give him permission to tender it through a public official, and having sealed
it, to deposit it in a temple, and thus be authorized to give the slave his
freedom, which he shall enjoy to the fullest extent, as well as the privilege
of Roman citizenship; and he shall have nothing to fear from the other joint-
owners, for they will
have no one to blame but themselves, if, when they were able to benefit by the
price of the slave, they refused to accept it.
(3) But in order that no doubt may arise with reference to the peculiumof the
slave, We decree that his peculiumshall be divided among all the joint-owners
in proportion to the ownership of each one in the slave; permission being
granted to him who, at the time of his death, liberated the slave, to transfer
to his freedman his share of the peculiumof the former. Moreover, there is no
doubt that the rights of patronage will pass to him who gave the slave his
freedom.
(4) Where, however, the slave is obliged to render accounts in order that no
loss may occur, or any impediment be placed in the way of emancipation, the
Governor of the province, or some competent magistrate, must fix the time
within which his accounts shall be rendered, and any debts which may appear by
them to be due shall be discharged, and he shall then obtain his liberty.
(5) Again, in order that there may be no doubt as to the amount of the price to
be paid for the slave, but that this may be perfectly clear, We order that the
valuation of a slave, whether male or female, provided he or she is not skilled
in any trade, shall be twenty solidi,and that those slaves who have reached
their tenth year shall be valued at only ten solidi.When, however, they are
skilled in any trade, with the exception of writers and physicians, their price
shall be established up to thirty solidi,whether they are men or women. A
writer or a physician, either male or female, shall be valued as follows: a
writer up to fifty solidi,and a physician up to sixty. When eunuchs, who are
common slaves and are over ten years of age, are not familiar with any trade,
they shall be valued at fifty solidi,but if they are skilled artisans they
shall be valued up to seventy. We do not wish eunuchs under ten years of age to
be valued at more than thirty solidi.
Joint-owners shall accept the amounts due to them according to the above-
mentioned standard, and shall be compelled by competent judges to grant the
slave his freedom.
(6) If one or more of the joint-owners of a slave desire to liberate him, or
release him at his own solicitation, the latter paying the price, or one or
more of them say that they desire to free him and pay his value, he shall be
preferred who first manifested this generous intention. But when all of them
come forward with the object of manumitting the slave, then a competent judge
shall compel them all to grant him his freedom without compensation, and his
peculium,shall be distributed among all the joint-owners in proportion to their
shares in the slave. All those who granted freedom to the slave shall be
equally entitled to the rights of patronage.
(7) The right of accrual, introduced by the ancient laws with reference to the
manumission of slaves owned in common, is hereby annulled, and We shall not
hereafter, under any circumstances, permit it to be considered.
Given on the Kalends ofApril, during the Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes,
530.
2. The Same to Julianus, Prastorian Prefect.
It was held by all the ancient jurisconsults that a slave owned in common
belonged partly to one master and partly to another, so that he could be
bequeathed to himself, or to others, hence the following question arose. Two or
more persons owned a slave in common, and one of them bequeathed his own share
to the slave, and this having caused perplexity, a serious controversy arose
among the ancients. Therefore We, having examined this bequest with great care,
think that it is capable of two interpretations, for the testator either
thought that the slave would become free, so far as his share, which he
bequeathed to him in this way, was concerned, or if this was not the case, he
was actuated by affection for his other joint-owner, in order that the slave
might be acquired by him, intending that his heirs should not gain possession
of the slave, so that it would be clear that he should not, by any means, be
included in the property of his
estate.
We, however, who are partisans of freedom, after investigation have come to the
conclusion that, with reference to the doubtful intention of the testator,
since he desired to liberate the slave, so far as his own share was concerned,
and as slaves owned in common are manumitted, We have already decided what was
necessary to be done under such circumstances, and the present case shall be
determined by the provisions of the aforesaid law. The slave shall therefore
become free, so far as the share of the testator is concerned, in compliance
with the will of the latter; and with reference to the other share, in
accordance with Our ruling, the price must be paid by the heir to the other
joint-owner, or owners, in obedience to the above-mentioned constitution, and
if they refuse to accept it, he shall tender it, seal it up, and deposit it at
their risk, as it is an attribute of Imperial Majesty to adopt the more humane
course instead of the harsher one.
TITLE Vill.
CONCERNING THE MANUMISSION OF A SLAVE WHO HAS BEEN GIVEN IN PLEDGE.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Proculus.
Although a husband, who is solvent, can manumit a dotal slave, still there is
no doubt that if it should appear that you have been given in pledge to his
wife, you cannot obtain your freedom without her consent.
2. The Same Emperors to Abascantus.
Where freedom is granted to a slave by a debtor of the Treasury, and the slave
has not been pledged by the terms of a special agreement but only under the
general privilege of the Treasury, the manumission cannot be annulled, unless
it is established that it was made with fraudulent intent.
3. The Same Emperors to Antony.
It is certain that he who has pledged the property which he now has, or may
hereafter acquire, can grant freedom to his slaves. This rule of law does not
apply to slaves who have been expressly encumbered by way of pledge, or
delivered for that purpose.
4. The Emperor Alexander to Sabiniamis.
If (as you allege) you, together with other slaves, after having been pledged,
were manumitted by the debtor, with the consent of his creditor, you are
entitled to your freedom.
Published on the sixth of the Idesof May, during the Consulate of Alexander,
223.
5. The Same Emperor to Extritatianus.
If the creditors have been paid, the female slaves who were pledged and
manumitted by the debtor will be free. If the person who manumitted them, or
his heirs, should, for the purpose of revoking their freedom, venture to say
that he had granted the manumission for the purpose of defrauding his
creditors, neither he nor his heirs shall be heard.
6. The Same Emperor to Auctionus.
If your guardian manumitted slaves purchased with your money, and said slaves,
together with other property belonging to or purchased with the property of the
wards, have been pledged in accordance with the constitution of the Emperors,
My Parents, the said slaves shall not, on account of the indulgence shown to
wards, become free.
7. The Emperor Gordian to Juliana.
If, at the time of your marriage, whether you gave slaves by way of dowry, or
whether, after the dowry was given, your husband purchased them with money
forming part of your dowry, the ownership of said slaves will justly belong to
you, and therefore you are vainly attempting to raise a question with reference
to their status after manumission, as they can legally be manumitted by him who
purchased them, or received them as dowry.
TITLE IX.
CONCERNING THE MANUMISSION OP SLAVES BELONGING TO THE STATE.
1. The Emperor Gordian to Epigonus.
If, as is provided by the municipal law and the Imperial Constitutions, you
have been regularly manumitted, when you were a public slave (with the consent
of the Governor of the province), you should not again be reduced to slavery on
the ground that you were not en-
titled to manumission because the slave whom you gave instead of yourself took
to flight.
2. The Same Emperor to Hadriana.
If the Governor of the province approved the decree by which he with whom you
afterwards (as you allege) were united in marriage received his freedom, there
is no doubt that the child born of a marriage of this kind is a Roman citizen
and under the control of his father.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Philadelphus.
The freedman of a municipality does not become a slave where the title by which
the ownership of slaves is usually established cannot be produced. If,
therefore, you have been manumitted according to the law of Vectibulicius
(whose authority it was held extended to the provinces under the Decree of the
Senate issued during the Consulate of Jubentius Celsus, Consul for the second
time, and Neratius Marcellus), you will be entitled to the rights of Roman
citizenship, nor did you afterwards, while a freedman, by discharging the
duties of a notary, lose the liberty which you obtained, and your act does not
offer any impediment to the acceptance of your son as decurion, as he was born
of parents who were free.
TITLE X.
CONCERNING SLAVES MANUMITTED BY OTHERS THAN THEIR MASTERS.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Cornelius.
It has frequently been stated in rescripts that anyone who manumits slaves
belonging to another, as if they were his own, will be required to pay to the
owners of the same their value, or the amount of damages which the latter may
have sustained.
Published during the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Antoninus and
Balbinus, 214.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Mercurialis.
If Felicissima, who you say purchased a slave by your order, manumitted him
without transferring his ownership to you, you, in vain, demand that he whom
you allege was manumitted should be refused his freedom, and that possession of
him should be delivered to you.
3. The Same Emperor to Pompeius.
He who sold you the estate will continue to be the owner of the property until
he delivers it to you, and, therefore, by manumitting a slave belonging to the
estate, he grants him his freedom.
Published on the sixth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of
Agricola and Clement, 231.
4. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to ZoUus.
If you did not give the ownership, but merely the services of the female slave
referred to, when granting her her freedom, the person to whom she was given
shall only have the use of her dependent upon your will, and your right of
ownership will not, in the slightest degree, be prejudiced, for no one can
bestow freedom upon a slave belonging to another by manumitting him as if he
was his own.
5. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Marcellina.
Where slaves have been given by way of donation, the donor has no right to
manumit them.
6. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Milius and Others.
If your father manumitted your slave, even with your consent, and you were
under the age of twenty years, he could not grant him his freedom.
7. The Emperor Constantine to Bassus.
Where freedom is granted to the slave of another than his master, and the
consent of judges who have a right to give it is obtained, there need be no
apprehension of the imposition of a penalty. If, however, it is established
that the act was legally performed by Our order, and it is proved that the
owner did not petition for authority to manumit the slave of another, then he
who is shown to have obtained his freedom by Our generosity to a person who was
not his master shall be immediately restored to him to whom his ownership
belongs, and he who manumitted the slave of another by deceiving the Emperor
shall be compelled to give two slaves of the s'ame sex, age, and occupation to
the master of the one whom he manumitted, and he shall also be compelled to
give three of the same kind to the Treasury.
This penalty should not always be imposed, but should preferably not be
inflicted if the manumitted slave is able to plead lawful prescription when a
question is raised as to his status, as the owner can only blame himself for
his loss, if he, by his silence, confirmed the act to his own disadvantage.
Published during the Idesof July, during the Consulate of Constantine, Consul
for the fifth time, and Licinius, 319.
TITLE XI.
WHO CANNOT MANUMIT SLAVES, AND CONCERNING THE PREVENTION OF MANUMISSION FOR THE
PURPOSE OF
DEFRAUDING CREDITORS. 1. The Emperor Alexander to Antiochus.
It is a certain rule of law established by the Lex &lia Sentia,that grants of
freedom for the purpose of defrauding creditors, when made directly, can only
be revoked where an intention to commit fraud ex^
ists; that is to say, when this is the design of the person who granted the
manumission, and a loss ensues as a result of the intent.
It was formerly decided that the beneficiaries of a trust should be classed as
creditors.
Published on the third of the Idesof November, during the Consulate of
Maximian, Consul for the fifth time, and ^lianus, 224.
2. The Same Emperor to Natalianus.
It is set forth in the Imperial Mandates that my slaves cannot, by means of the
interposition of other persons, confer freedom on slaves who constitute part of
their peculium.
3. The Same Emperor to Justina.
The Senate, at the suggestion of the Divine Marcus, provided that no one could
manumit his own slave, or the slave of another who was a performer in an
exhibition which was being given, and that, if this took place, the manumission
should be considered void.
4. The Same Emperor to Felicissimus.
If, while under twenty years of age, you delivered slaves for the purpose of
rendering them free, it has been decided by a Decree of the Senate that your
act is void.
Extract from Novel 119, Chapter II. Latin Text.
At the present time, however, those who have testamentary capacity can bequeath
freedom to slaves, the ancient law having been repealed.
5. The Same Emperor to Priscus.
When it can be proved that freedom was fraudulently granted by persons indebted
to the Treasury, the act will not be valid. If, however, he who you state is
your father paid the purchaser the money, and the slave, having been redeemed
by him, obtained his freedom, it cannot be said that the property of a debtor
to the Treasury has been, in any respect, diminished.
6. The Emperor Diocletian and Maximian, and the Gsesars, to Olympia.
It is a positive rule of law that a guardian cannot grant freedom to slaves
under a trust with which his female ward has been charged. Hence, if you were
charged with their manumission, and did not liberate them when you arrived at
the age fixed by the testator, but your guardian did so, they will still remain
in servitude.
7. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Zoticus.
If your master, who was indebted on account of his administration of a
curatorship, having been proved to be insolvent, should bequeath you your
freedom under a trust, this will be of no advantage to you, as in all fiduciary
grants of freedom the condition of the estate must only be considered.
TITLE XII. WHO CANNOT OBTAIN THEIR FREEDOM.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Torquatus.
As my Father, the Divine Claudius, decided that persons condemned to perpetual
imprisonment could not be liberated by the Governors of provinces, or by other
officials who have authority to punish crime; and that those sentenced for a
term of years, who have been appointed heirs, or have received legacies or
bequests under a trust cannot, during their imprisonment, obtain their freedom;
nor can any one of those to whom such bequests have been made acquire them; but
if they have served out the time for which they were condemned, and have been
released from all restraint, and, as it were, restored to their former simple
condition of slavery, they will be entitled to their freedom, if it was left to
them by the will of a deceased person during the period of their sentence,
without any question being raised as to the punishment which they have
undergone.
2. The Emperors Valerian and Galliemis to Theodore.
He who has been forbidden by will to be manumitted cannot obtain his freedom.
But in the case proposed, it makes a difference whether or not those whom the
testator forbade to be sold or manumitted, stating that they had been brought
up with his children, did so because he considered their services necessary to
his household, and for the benefit of his children, or whether he imposed this
restriction as a penalty for bad behavior: for, in the first instance, the
slaves can obtain their liberty after the death of those whose interests were
consulted, but in the second, what has been decided with reference to the
punishment of slaves will remain in full force.
It was decided by My Divine Parents that the provisions of wills imposing
perpetual servitude upon undeserving slaves should be observed, in order that
they might not obtain their freedom through a fraudulent purchaser.
TITLE XIII.
FOR WHAT REASONS SLAVES CAN RECEIVE THEIR FREEDOM AS A REWARD.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Firmanus.
Since scrupulous care as well as the authority of the law should be exercised
for the purpose of increasing and encouraging the practice of fidelity by
slaves, if you can establish by undoubted proof that you have strenuously
exerted yourself to avenge the death of your master, the freedom which was long
since ordered by Decrees of the Senate and Laws of the Emperors to be granted
to slaves who avenge the death of their masters cannot be conferred upon you,
even after having rendered so great a service, merely through the performance
of your act, but you must obtain it by appearing before the tribunal of the
Governor, and in consequence of his decree.
Published on the seventh of the Idesof December, during the Consulate of
Maximus.
2. The Emperor Constantine to Januarius.
Slaves who publicly denounce those who engage in the nefarious occupation of
counterfeiting money shall be given Roman citizenship, and their master shall
be paid their value by the Treasury.
Given at Rome, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate
of Crispus.
3. The Same Emperor to the People.
If a slave should publicly denounce someone guilty of ravishing a virgin, who
has escaped arrest through the connivance of the injured person, or because a
compromise has been effected, he shall be given his freedom.
Given on the day before the Kalendsof April.
4. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Syag-rius.
When a slave betrays a deserter from the army, he shall be presented with his
freedom.
Given on the Idesof July at Rome, ....
TITLE XIV. CONCERNING THE MANUMISSION OF FREEBORN PERSONS.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Philetus.
If, although you have been manumitted by will, you state that you are freeborn,
you should bring your case before the proper court, and if you have a lawful
opponent, that is to say, one who alleges that he is your patron, you must
remember that the Senate decreed that those who, after their manumission,
claimed to be freeborn, must leave in the house of the person who manumitted
them any property which they may have acquired while there. It has been decided
by authorities learned in the law that whatever was bequeathed or given to a
freedman is included under this head.
2. The Emperor Gordian to Pompeia.
Neither provision for support, nor the services exacted of servitude, will
render a freeborn woman a slave, nor will manumission render her a freedwoman.
Published on the fifth of the Idesof May, during the Consulate of Sabinus,
Consul for the second time, and Venustus, 241.
3. The Emperor Philip to Felicissimus.
If it is proved that your grandmother, although manumitted as a slave, was
afterwards solemnly declared to be freeborn, and her con-
dition was established by the authority of a judicial decision, and you brought
this matter to the attention of persons learned in the law, you must have
readily ascertained that her children, even though they were born before the
decision was rendered, have good reason to demand their liberty, as being
freeborn.
4. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csssars, to Agrippa.
Asyou state that one of your freeborn relatives, who was made prisoner under
the rule of the faction of Palmyra, and sold as a captive, the Governor of the
province will see that he recovers his status as a freeborn citizen.
5. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Crescens.
It is extremely unjust for the condition of freeborn persons to be disputed
through the mistake or malice of others, especially as you allege that one
Governor after another has been applied to by you to summon the adverse party,
in order that he might oppose your claim, if he thought that he had a valid
defence. As the result of this, it appears that the Governor of the province,
being influenced by your statements, rendered a decision that you should not
hereafter be subjected to annoyance. Therefore, if the other party should still
remain obstinate, the Governor, having been applied to, shall take measures to
have you protected from wrong.
Given on the day before the Nonesof ....
6. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Dionysius.
It is a perfectly clear rule of law that a person who is free cannot become the
slave of one who is aware of his condition. Therefore, as you allege that the
father of the ward of whom you have made mention in your petition kept you in
his service as a freeman for a long time, he could not have changed your
condition without having a legal title by which the ownership of property is
ordinarily acquired.
Ordered on the seventh of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.
7. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Matrona.
If it is established that you and your children are freeborn, the fact of your
birth will be a sufficient defence, for he who raises the question of slavery
by renouncing any claims which he may have, can, in no way, weaken the evidence
of freebirth, or gain any advantage by doing so.
8. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Callimorphus.
Freeborn persons come into the world as such. Freedmen can only be created by
manumission. Moreover, an agreement cannot confer the privilege of free birth
upon either slaves or freedmen, nor can the rights of those who have not given
their consent to a transaction of this kind be prejudiced in any way.
9. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Patamon.
It is a clear and manifest rule of law that a woman born of a mother who has
been manumitted is born free, and therefore, as you allege that since your
mother was a freedwoman, and was afterwards captured by the enemy, and returned
home under the rule of postliminium,and that now the question is raised whether
or not you are a slave, you must appear before the Governor of the province,
who has jurisdiction of cases in which freedom is involved, and he will render
a decision according to law, knowing that neither the status of your mother
under such circumstances nor the captivity which she endured will change her
former condition in any respect.
10. The Same Emperors and Csssars to Athenodora.
Names are given by public consent for the purpose of recognizing individuals,
and no damage results if they are changed for the purpose of concealing the
origin of persons who are freeborn; and the possession of anyone as a slave
(even though he may perform the services of one) does not render him such if he
was born free.
11. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Maxima.
If no title establishes the right to possess you as a slave, but, on the other
hand, you can prove that you were born free, and performed services for wages,
which were agreed upon, your condition is in no respect injuriously affected,
nor will you be forbidden to institute legal proceedings to compel the
fulfillment of the contract.
Ordered on the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of the Csesars.
12. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Quieta.
The commission of the crime of kidnapping has no effect in changing the status
of a freeborn woman; but it is established that one who has been abducted can,
even afterwards, remain in the condition in which she was born.
Ordered on the third of ....
13. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Melander.Anyone who contends that he is
freeborn, but is unable to prove it, does not necessarily lose his status as a
freedman. Ordered on the seventh of the Idesof December.
14. The Same fflmperors and Csesars to Aristotle.The condition of a freeborn
woman can, in no way, be prejudiced, merely from the fact that she has been
given in betrothal as a female
slave.
Ordered on the seventh of the Kalendsof January, ....
TITLE XV.
GENERAL PROVISIONS WITH REFERENCE TO MANUMISSIONS. 1. The Emperor Justinian to
Julianus, Prsetorian Prefect.
We order that if the owner of a slave, whose usufruct belongs to another,
should grant him his freedom, he shall not, according to the ancient rule, be
deprived of it, but shall be considered as having no master, so that no one can
be found to whom any property which may be acquired by him will belong.
If, however, both the owner and the usufructuary should agree to liberate him,
he will become free without any restriction; and if he should afterwards
acquire any property, it shall be his. But when the owner alone sets him free,
without the consent of the usufructuary, he who, in this way, obtains his
liberty from his owner, shall be included among the freedmen of the latter; and
if he should afterwards obtain any property, he shall acquire it in his own
name and be permitted to leave it to his descendants, the right of patronage
being always reserved, unless his emancipator was deprived of it by the laws.
The freedman himself, however, shall remain with the usufructuary as a slave,
as long as the former lives, unless he is deprived of the usufruct in a lawful
manner. Where the usufruct is terminated in any way, then the slave shall be
permitted to reside wherever he pleases. If, however, the freedman should die
during the lifetime of the usufructuary, his estate shall descend according to
law. Where the usufructuary alone grants freedom to the slave, the usufruct
reverts to the owner, and he will enjoy complete authority over the slave, and
the latter will acquire all property for him, in accordance with what has been
generally provided with reference to slaves and masters. If the usufructuary
should release the slave from the usufruct, for the purpose of doing him a
favor, and then present him with his freedom, the slave will remain under the
control of the owner, but the necessity is not imposed upon slaves during the
life of the usufructuary, or for the time that the usufruct may exist, to obey
the owner, and perform the services required of a slave, but Our judge shall
see that he remains unmolested.
After the death of the usufructuary, or where the usufruct has been
extinguished in any way, he shall serve the master as a slave, and all property
which may, in the meantime, come into his hands, he will acquire for his
master.
This separation shall exist between masters and slaves as provided by the terms
of Our Constitution, and not in accordance with the ancient law by which the
said slaves remained without a master.
(1) We make the following addition to this law, namely, that the ancient
distinction of persons having been abolished, parents of either sex shall be
permitted, in the case of sons and daughters who are under their control or
emancipated and their descendants of every degree, to impose their commands
upon them by will, so far as granting freedom to slaves is concerned; whether
the testator desired that
this should be done in a church, or in any other lawful manner which he might
select. For, since in successions, as well as in almost all other things, no
distinction is made between children, this rule must be observed (and above all
in the present instance) in favor of freedom which is especially and peculiarly
Our care to cherish and protect by the Roman laws.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of
Lampadius and Orestes, 530.
2. The Same Emperor to Julianus, Prsetorian Prefect.
Where anyone bestows freedom upon a slave, either in a church or any other
sacred edifice, or in any tribunal, or before any judge who has authority under
the law to grant freedom, whether this be done by will, or by any final
disposition of property, either directly or under the terms of a trust, the age
of those who obtain their freedom shall, under no circumstances, offer any
impediment. For We do not wish that those only who have passed the age of
thirty shall acquire Roman citizenship, as was formerly done, but, as in the
case of ecclesiastical enfranchisement, no distinction of age exists, so
whenever freedom is granted by masters to slaves either under last wills,
before magistrates, or in any other legal manner, We order that they shall all
become Roman citizens; for We think that the number of those should rather be
increased than diminished.
3. The Same Emperor to John, Praetorian Prefect.
Where a man who has no wife keeps his female slave as a concubine, and persists
in this practice until his death, whether he had children by her or not, We
order that the said female slave shall, under no circumstances, belong to his
heirs, and that her children, if she has any, shall not be reduced to slavery;
but that, after the death of her master, she, together with her offspring, if
she has had any by the deceased, shall obtain their freedom in the manner to be
explained hereafter.
We grant permission to the master, during his lifetime, to make use of his
female slaves, as well as of their offspring, in any way that he may desire,
and to dispose of them by his last will in accordance with his wishes; that is
to say, bequeath them as slaves to others, or leave them by name to his heirs
to remain in servitude.
But if he should pass them over in silence, then, after his death, they shall
obtain their freedom, which will date from the death of their master. Neither
the ancient laws nor Our own, however, permit men who have wives to keep either
freedwomen, or slaves as concubines.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof November, after the Consulate of
Lampadius and Orestes, 531.



TITLE XVI. CONCERNING CASES INVOLVING FREEDOM.

1. The Emperor Antoninus to Saturninus.
You confess that you have committed an unlawful and dishonorable act, as you
state that your own children, who were born free, have been sold by you; but,
for the reason that what you have done cannot injure your children, go before a
competent judge (if you desire to do so) in order that the case may be decided
in conformity with the law.
Published on the fifth of the Ides ofFebruary, ....

2. The Same Emperor to Veronianus.
If those who you allege are your slaves are declared by others to be free,
their status must be determined in the ordinary way, for even where a decision
has been rendered with reference to their ownership, this cannot be advanced in
opposition to a matter involving freedom.
Given at Rome on the Nonesof February, during the Consulate of Messala and
Sabinus, 215.
3. The Emperor Alexander to Quirinus.
If a freeman cohabits with the female slave of another, he does not become the
slave of her master, even if he has been notified to abandon her.
Published on the Nonesof February, during the Consulate of Fuscus and Dexter,
226.
4. The Same Emperor to Jocundus.
If he whom you claim as a slave has, after proper investigation, been decided
to be free (although this may have been done in your absence), another
opportunity to claim him as a slave shall not be afforded you. If, however,
after you ascertained the fact, you appealed from the decision of the judge, it
shall be determined by the appellate court whether judgment was rendered in
accordance with law.
5. The Same Emperor to Sabinus.
The woman whom you declared to be your slave is none the less entitled to
demand her freedom, because you purchased her from the Treasury. Nor can
recourse to prescription be had at the present time, because, when the sale
took place, the woman was more than twenty years old, as age cannot be pleaded
by way of prescription against Roman citizenship, unless the slave is shown to
have consented to become such in consideration of sharing the price.
The burden of proof is placed upon one who, being a slave, asserts that he is
free, and if he cannot establish his assertion, you will obtain the undisputed
right of possession.
6. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus, and the Csesar Valerian, to Versimenus.
Even if you voluntarily stated in writing that you were a slave, and not free,
you would not, by doing so, prejudice your rights in
any respect, and this is all the more true as you allege that you are compelled
to do this.
7. The Emperor Aurelian to Secundus.
If you have been manumitted by the person whose slave you were, there is no
reason for you to maintain the controversy with reference to your freedom, and
above all, with the heir who manumitted you; for even if your freedom was not
legally obtained, the heir, on account of his acceptance of the estate, has
confirmed the will of the deceased by his consent.
8. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Verina.
As you allege that it was agreed between your former owner and yourself that he
should, upon the payment of a certain sum of money, manumit you as well as your
daughter, and he only liberated you, you should appear before the Governor of
the province and he will urge your former master to abide by his agreement, all
respect which freedmen are accustomed to display toward their patrons being
shown him.
Given on the day before ...., during the Consulate of Maximus, Consul for the
second time, and Aquilinus, 286.
9. The Same Emperors and Ciesars to Proculus.
As the terms of your petition set forth, he against whom you filed it is the
son of your female slave, still as you refer to him by a name which can only be
borne by persons who are free, and state that he is not a slave, but only bears
the stigma of servitude, you are notified that your petition is directed
against one who is not a slave.
10. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Stratonicus.
It is a positive rule of law that freemen cannot become slaves, and their
condition be changed either by a private agreement, or by any act of
administration whatsoever.
11. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Faustinus.
Slaves will not change their status if they unlawfully and dishonorably obtain
public office. Wherefore, if a question arises with reference to yours, you are
advised that it is of no advantage to you that your father enjoyed civil
distinction. Hence, after all the legal formalities have been complied with,
your condition must be determined by the Governor of the province.
12. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Proculus.
If you were born of a female slave, and someone purchased you, you will remain
in the condition in which you formerly were; but if, being the child of a
female slave, your natural father, who was also your master, sold you, and
afterwards you paid the price to the purchaser, you will not, for that reason,
obtain your freedom.
Published on the eighteenth of the Kalendsof May, ....
13. The Same Emperors and Caesars to Paulus.
Ajudicial tribunal cannot concern itself principally with the status of a
deceased person. If, then, property is claimed, as part of the
peculiumbelonging to the estate of him whom you mention as having bequeathed
it, or if any question arises as to the status of his children, all these
points must be formally decided by the Governor of the province.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof May, ....
14. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Quintianus.
When proceedings have been instituted with reference to one whose liberty is in
dispute, and he is in possession of it, he will, in the meantime, be considered
free.
Given at Heraclea, on the fourth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of
the above-mentioned Emperors.
15. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Palladius.
The loss of a document establishing anyone's birth does not exclude other
evidence to prove the same, nor can a forged document of this kind affect the
truth. Therefore, in order to ascertain the truth every proof allowed by law
should be admitted, and the Governor of the province having been applied to,
and all requisite formalities having been observed, he will decide the case
between you in accordance with the legal requirements.
16. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Diogenia.
If you, being a free woman, have served as such, and, without your knowledge,
an instrument was drawn up under whose terms you were given by way of dowry as
a female slave, these things can, in no way, prejudice your freedom; and, above
all, as you state that you were a minor at the time, and it has been decided
that minors less than twenty years old can, under no circumstances, change
their status and become slaves instead of freemen, in order that no one may
unintentionally lose his liberty before reaching the age at which others cannot
confer it without authority.
Published on the sixth of the Idesof May, during the Consulate of Hadrian.
17. The Same Emperors and Caesars to Resinus.
In numerous instances, the status of brothers who are freeborn varies, on
account of the commission of crime, or other events which have taken place.
Therefore, there is nothing to prevent the question of status being raised with
reference to those whom you assert are your brothers, and whether they shall be
claimed as slaves, or maintained in servitude. Hence, other evidence is
necessary to establish their freedom, for it is clear that the fact that your
liberty has not been questioned is not sufficient proof.
18. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Zoticus.
The lease made to you by the person against whose heirs you have brought suit
is not sufficient evidence of your free origin, nor does this alone show
conclusively that you are a slave.
Given on the Idesof July, at Philippi, under the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.
19. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Paulus.
In Our opinion, he against whom you have filed your petition, rather than you
yourself, has the principal interest in the case, for as you state that you
have given him his freedom, it is more to his interest to formally defend his
status, and consequently your case also is included in his; for if he is
declared to be a slave by the party against whom you have filed your petition,
he can claim his freedom on the ground of your manumission, and, by proving his
original servitude, and showing that he obtained his freedom through your
having manumitted him, your right of patronage will be preserved.
When, however, he prefers to remain a slave, then, after having appeared before
the Governor of the province, you will be permitted by law to defend him even
against his own consent.
20. The Same Emperors and Caesars to Mternalis.
Just as when freedom has once been conferred it cannot be revoked, so, where
masters take any steps whatever against their own slaves, without the intention
of manumitting them, they will sustain no loss.
Ordered on the sixth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors.
21. The Same Emperors and C&sars to Thrasylla.
It is provided by the Perpetual Edict that a woman who is found in the
possession of freedom fraudulently obtained occupies the same position as one
who is still in servitude. If, however, any controversy should arise, whether
she who is in slavery petitions for freedom, or whether it is clearly proved
that, while free, an attempt has been made to enslave her, no fraud committed
by a female slave should deprive her master of his rights.
Ordered on the Nonesof October, during the Consulate of the above-mentioned
Emperors.
22. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Pardala.
It is a man's parents, and not his own statements, that establish the fact of
his birth. Wherefore, if, having been born of a female slave, and afterwards
manumitted, you obtained your freedom, you can, by no means, lose it, either
through fraudulently or erroneously contending that you are the child of
another female slave, for slaves are known to be born in that condition, and
are not rendered such merely by their own assertions.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors.
23. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Muscia.
If freedom was directly bequeathed to you by your master in his will, and his
daughters succeeded him as his appointed heirs, it does not follow that, either
according to his will, or in opposition to it, if you serve one of his
daughters, the others can revoke your freedom.
24. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Sebastian.
Awoman is not excluded from demanding her freedom, if she has been interrogated
and has publicly acknowledged that she is a slave.
25. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Licentianus.
When the instruments evidencing manumission, which was legally effected, have
not been drawn up, this, in no way, prejudices the grant of freedom, so that,
if you have liberated a slave, the failure to execute such instruments cannot
possibly injure him.
Ordered on the fifth of the Idesof February, during the Consulate of the
Caesars.
26. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Modestus.
A patron cannot revoke freedom when it has once been bestowed upon a manumitted
slave; and he can be compelled to produce the instrument evidencing the
manumission.
27. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Austerius.
If Arianus was declared to be free, after the question as to his status had
been raised by Leonis, he cannot again be claimed as a slave by the former,
after he has lost his case. A co-heir having been given to you by Arianus, who
was in collusion with the person who raised the controversy with reference to
the status of the deceased, or his heirs, cannot injure you in any respect, nor
can admissions made by them affect the truth, or change the condition of the
estate of the deceased.
28. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Eurymedontus.
The fact that a paternal grandfather was invested with the dignity of a
magistrate can be of no advantage to his grandson, in proving that he is free,
as in a case involving freedom the status of the mother and not that of the
father must be considered. The civil condition of the maternal grandmother is
not of itself sufficient, for although she was proved to be free, still, a
person's status may be lost in many ways.
Given on the fourth of the Idesof April, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.
29. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Troila.
There is no doubt that a daughter born of a female slave, and who was purchased
by the man with whom she afterwards lived in concubinage, will remain in
servitude if she is not manumitted.
30. The Same Emperors and Caesars to Eutychia.Freedom, when once bestowed,
cannot be revoked under the sole pretext that proper respect has not been shown
to the patron.
31. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Cassiana.
If an inquiry has been wrongfully instituted for the purpose of proving you to
be a slave, and you have brought suit for malicious prosecution, or for injury
committed (whichever one you may select), and it has been decided that you were
a slave, you can afterwards ask that judgment be rendered against the adverse
party, and that restitution be made of the property of which you can prove that
you are deprived, after a decision has been given declaring you to be free.
32. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Athenais.
The signature of the son of the master who manumitted you does not add anything
to, or if it is omitted, does not detract in any way from a grant of freedom.
33. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Melitiana.
Although your master manumitted you after you had paid him a sum of money,
still the freedom which you have received cannot be revoked.
Ordered on the third of the Idesof November, during the Consulate of the
Csesars.
34. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Eremonia.A free woman does not become a
slave on account of living in concubinage.
Given on the Idesof November, during the Consulate of the
Caesars.
35. The Same Emperors and Csssars to Attatus.
The fact that a person is said to have administered the affairs of a minor in
the capacity of his guardian does not release him from defending himself, when
the question as to whether or not he is a slave is raised.
Given on the Nonesof November, during the Consulate of the Caesars.
36. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Theodore.
When a mistress agrees with her female slave that, after having served her for
a certain time, she shall become free, she will, by no means, be required to
observe her contract. On the other hand, it is also true that a free woman can
not be compelled to comply with her agreement, if she is proved to have
promised to give you her own children as slaves.
37. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Olympius.
If you sold your son, who is free, to your son-in-law, who, being so closely
connected with you, could not pretend ignorance of his condition, you cannot
accuse one another of crime.
38. The Same Emperors and Caesars to Philesarphus.
An action to determine your status can be brought against you, in the name of
the State, notwithstanding the fact that no one denies that you have been
created limenarch.1
Given at Nicomedia, on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of the Caesars.
39. The Same Emperors and Caesars to Potesenticus.
It is settled that freemen who allege that they are slaves cannot change their
condition.
Ordered on the seventh of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of the
Caesars.
40. A Copy of the Imperial Letters of the Above-Mentioned Emperors and Ctesars
to Verutus.
According to the provisions of Our Edict, nothing will prevent a case involving
freedom from being heard and a decision rendered in accordance with justice,
notwithstanding the absence of one of the parties, whether the controversy
arose with reference to manumission or free birth.
41. The Emperors Constantine and Licinius to Eutychius, Governor of Cappadocia.
We order that all the letters that the mistress of the slave ^lius wrote to him
as Chief Decurion shall be null and void and revoked as of no effect, and that
the investigation to determine the free birth of the said ^lius shall proceed,
nor shall the rights of the woman be prejudiced for the reason that she
addressed him as Chief Decurion, or that he himself pretended to be a decurion
or the head of that body, when his servile condition has been ascertained not
only by the testimony of witnesses, and that of his relatives, but also by the
admissions made by himself in the presence of another magistrate.
42. The Emperor Constantius to Maximus, Prsetorian Prefect.
It has been decided that children born of a mother whose condition is contested
shall follow her after judgment has been rendered in the case. Any, however,
whose birth occurred before the suit was instituted, shall have their status
determined separately, since those alone who were born during the proceedings
are to be included in the decision given with reference to their mother, and
shall either be delivered to their lawful owners, or enjoy their freedom with
their parents.
Given on the day before the Idesof July, ....
11 TThhee lliimmeennaarrcchh wwaass tthhee hhaarrbboorrmmaasstteerr,, oorr iinnssppeeccttoorr ooff vveesssseellss,, ccoorrrreessppoonnddiinngg ttoo
tthhee ccaappttaaiinn ooff tthhee ppoorrtt ooff mmooddeerrnn EEuurrooppeeaann nnaattiioonnss.. ---  --- EEDD..
TTIITTLLEE XXVVIIII..
CONCERNING THE ABOLITION OF LEGAL, ASSERTIONS THAT A MAN Is FREE.
1. The Emperor Justinian to Menna, Prsetorian Prefect.
We order that actions involving the servile condition which have been begun
shall be regarded with favor, as well as shortened; and direct that if anyone
who, up to the time, has served as a slave, should declare himself to be free,
or while enjoying freedom should be claimed as a slave, he shall, in neither
instance, be required to provide a defender,1 but shall himself answer in his
own proper person the claim of him who alleges that he is his master; and if,
after having been in the possession of freedom, he should be reduced to
slavery, he shall be forbidden to employ an attorney, We absolutely forbid
those who have passed from slavery to freedom to defend themselves in this way,
all the laws which provide that cases requiring defenders shall be heard a
second and a third time being, for the future, repealed; for it is just that
the first decision should remain in full force, where no appeal is taken. If
one is taken, the judge shall examine the case just as he would any other which
has been appealed, without a second examination being required by the laws
enacted with reference to cases in which defenders appear, and which We have
rescinded.
(1) We also abolish the ancient rule requiring defence in actions involving the
peculiumor other personal effects of slaves, directing that not ,only the
peculiumof those who, while in servitude, have tak.en legal steps to become
free, but also any other property which is claimed shall be placed in safe-
keeping, by order of court.
(2) Moreover, all those whose freedom is in danger through their being claimed
as slaves shall be compelled to furnish a surety, if they wish to do so; but
when it is impossible for them to provide one, and this is clearly proved to
the judge, they shall be bound by being sworn.
If, after proceedings of this kind have been instituted, they purposely absent
themselves, and, having been summoned to appear, remain absent for more than a
year; they shall, by all means, be reduced to slavery, and decided beyond
question to be the property of him who brought suit against them.
11 TThhee dduuttyy ooff tthhee aaddsseerrttoorr lliibbeerrttaattiissooff RRoommaann jjuurriisspprruuddeennccee ccoorrrreessppoonnddss ttoo tthhaatt
ooff tthhee pprroocchheeiinn aammiiooff tthhee CCoommmmoonn LLaaww wwhhoo wwaass aauutthhoorriizzeedd ttoo bbrriinngg ssuuiitt iinn bbeehhaallff
ooff aann iinnffaanntt wwhhoo ccoouulldd nnoott aacctt hhiimmsseellff;; hhiiss gguuaarrddiiaann,, iiff hhee hhaadd oonnee,, bbeeiinngg,,
uunnddeerr aallll cciirrccuummssttaanncceess,, oobblliiggeedd ttoo ddeeffeenndd hhiimm.. ""AAnn iinnffaanntt,, oorr aa mmiinnoorr,, sshhaallll
ssuuee bbyy pprroocchheeiinn aammiiaanndd ddeeffeenndd bbyy gguuaarrddiiaann.."" ((CCookkee,, IInnssttiittuutteess IIII,, 22,, 3355aa..))
IInn bbootthh iinnssttaanncceess,, aannyyoonnee,, eevveenn aa cchhiilldd,, wwhheetthheerr aa rreellaattiivvee oorr nnoott,, wwhhoo wwaass
wwiilllliinngg ttoo uunnddeerrttaakkee tthhee ttaasskk,, ccoouulldd rreepprreesseenntt tthhee ssllaavvee aass aaddsseerrttoorr,,oorr tthhee
mmiinnoorr aass pprrooxxiimmuuss aammiiccuuss,,oorr nneexxtt ffrriieenndd;; nneeiitthheerr ooff wwhhoomm,, iiff aappppeeaarriinngg iinn hhiiss
oowwnn ppeerrssoonn,, wwoouulldd hhaavvee aannyy ssttaannddiinngg iinn ccoouurrtt.. TThhee aaddsseerrttoorrppllaacceedd hhiiss hhaanndd uuppoonn
tthhee aalllleeggeedd ssllaavvee bbeeffoorree aa mmaaggiissttrraattee,, aanndd ""aasssseerrtteedd"" tthhaatt hhee wwaass ffrreeee.. UUnnddeerr
tthhee LLaaww ooff tthhee TTwweellvvee TTaabblleess hhee wwaass nnoott oobblliiggeedd ttoo ffuurrnniisshh sseeccuurriittyy iinn aa ssuumm
eexxcceeeeddiinngg ffiiffttyy aasssseess,,oorr aabboouutt ttwweennttyy--ffiivvee cceennttss ooff oouurr mmoonneeyy..
TThhee pprreejjuuddiicciiaall aaccttiioonn,, ddee ccaauussaa HHbbeerraallii,,wwaass tthhee oonnee eemmppllooyyeedd iinn ccaasseess
iinnvvoollvviinngg tthhee ffrreeeeddoomm ooff aa ppeerrssoonn ddeeccllaarreedd ttoo bbee aa ssllaavvee.. ---  --- EEDD..
(3) Again, We wish those who claim anyone as a slave to know that, if after the
first demand has been presented in any court, or made by virtue of an Imperial
Rescript, and he who is alleged to be a slave has been notified, and, having
been released, the parties bring another claim against him in a different
court, even if the reputed slave should have given occasion for this to be
done, the plaintiffs, although they may be his legal masters, shall be deprived
of their right.
Given on the third of the Idesof December, ....
2. The Same Emperor to John, Prsetorian Prefect.
We think that the difficulty which may arise under Our present law, authorizing
adsertores,should be disposed of by a comprehensive remedy. As the action with
reference to freedom was usually conducted by them, if, while this was taking
place, the principal party in interest should die, the necessity was,
nevertheless, imposed upon the adsertorto conduct the case to a conclusion, so
that if the purchaser should be defeated, and a decision be rendered in favor
of freedom, he can have recourse against the vendor, and the latter return to
him what was contained in the bill of sale, or what the nature of the contract
required, on account of having sold him a person who was free.
Moreover, as the empty name of adsertoris abolished by the present law, if any
person whose status is the subject of litigation should die, how can the
judgment be executed where only one party is left to appear in court? Therefore
We decree that, in the present instance, the purchaser shall be permitted to
proceed against the vendor to the extent of proving that the latter sold him a
freeman as a slave, or if he cannot do this, that he should be subjected to the
risk of eviction for having sold a person who was free.
TITLE XVIII.
WHAT SLAVES ARE NOT PERMITTED TO DECLARE THAT
THEY ARE FREE, AND CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF
THOSE WHO ARE FORBIDDEN TO Do So.
1. The Emperor Gordian to Proculus.
The case of him who, concealing his condition, permitted himself to be sold as
a slave, differs from that of him who shared in the price paid for himself; for
the former is not denied the right to demand his freedom, but if the latter was
a Roman citizen, and shared in the price, he cannot claim this right. The most
eminent legal authorities have decided that the same rule is applicable to one
who is entitled to his freedom under the terms of a trust.
Published on the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Gordian and Aviola,
240.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Melana.
Our predecessors, the Emperors, decreed that freedom should be denied to the
descendants of the families of robbers who had been made slaves by Imperial
donation, or by the authority of the Treasury.
3. The Emperor Constantine to Maximus, Prsetorian Prefect.
When anyone demands his freedom, he will be entitled to any of his property
which he states is in the hands of his alleged master, since, if there is no
question as to his status, the judge must at once order it to be restored, and
delivered to him. When, however, there is any doubt as to the ownership of
property which he claims, because the master refuses to surrender it, a bond
shall be executed to preserve it, and the hearing of the case shall be
postponed. If the freedom of the reputed slave should be established (as those
must be protected who have entrusted him with their property) an account of his
administration must be rendered, and everything which is due shall be paid, so
that if he is proved to be free, he who formerly acted as his master may
acquire what was given to the slave by the right of ownership, as well as
whatever was derived from the possession and profits of the said property, and
anything obtained surreptitiously from it by the alleged slave; as that could
not be free which the master placed in the hands of his slave as peculium.
Property, however, obtained either by will or donation, or which was purchased
or acquired with the profits of the same, shall belong to the said alleged
slave as being freeborn. After judgment has been rendered declaring him to be
free, all this property should be sequestered, after having been separated from
that above mentioned; so that, both having been set aside and placed in full
view, each of the parties may claim that to which he is entitled.
Given at Thessalonica, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof March, under the
Consulate of Severus and Rufinus, 343.
TITLE XIX. CONCERNING THE ORDER OF JUDICIAL INQUIRIES.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Vitalius.
As you, yourself, have acknowledged that a controversy has arisen concerning
your status, with what reason do you demand that, before it has been
established, you should be granted authority to accuse him who contends that
you are his slave ?
Therefore, as you allege that you are confident of success, appear before the
Governor of the province, who, in accordance with the general rule, will not
hesitate to render a proper decision with reference to the crime said to have
been committed, dependent, of course, upon the result of the case involving
your freedom, which must first be determined.
Published during the Idesof . . . , during the Consulate of Maximus, Consul for
the eleventh time, and Julianus, 224.
2. The Same Emperor to Gallits.
Where a controversy has arisen both with reference to the title to an estate
and the right of someone to freedom, the latter must first be heard. Where only
the ownership of the estate is directly concerned, any question involving
freedom must first be decided; but it will be sufficient for him who enjoys his
liberty to have succeeded, where judgment was rendered in his favor in an
action brought to recover the estate.
Published on the fifth of the Idesof August, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, 224.
3. The Same Emperor to Valerius.
If an accusation of crime is brought against a woman whom you say is freeborn,
the Governor must not take cognizance of this case before deciding the one in
which her liberty is involved, as, if the crime should be proved, it will be
necessary in the first place to ascertain whether she must be punished as a
woman who was free and freeborn, or as a female slave.
4. The Emperor Gordian to Menedemits.
If a controversy has arisen with reference to your status, and a decision
should be rendered in your favor at the termination of the case, you will not
be prevented from proceeding against him who asserted that he was your master.
If, however, he did not claim you as his own slave, but accused you of being
the slave of another, no judgment should be rendered on the question of
freedom, and the examination of the case before the judge will show whether the
accusation should be heard in order to determine your condition, or whether it
should be rejected.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of Gordian
and Aviola, 240.
5. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Al-phenus.
As you allege that a controversy has arisen with reference to your status, and
that you desire to bring suit to collect certain debts, the ordinary practice,
under such circumstances, is for the case involving your freedom to be decided
by the Governor of the province, after the usual formalities have been complied
with (if the law permits this to be done) ; and if you should become free, or
the decision should be that you are not a slave, then the magistrate will order
your debts to be paid to you, provided they are lawfully due; as, if the decree
should set forth that you are a slave, it is uncertain whether they are due
ttooyou as a freeman, or to your master, and their payment cannot be exacted from
your debtor.
Ordered on the day before the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.
6. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Alexandria.
If you allege that your property has been stolen or carried away by those whom
you claim as your slaves, and they should apply to a court to grant them
freedom, and the case should be decided against them, actions for damages and
for property clandestinely removed must then be brought before the Governor of
the province, and if the persons in question are decided to be free, or not
slaves, the actions for damages and to recover whatever has been removed can be
tried; and, after proper evidence has been offered, they shall be sentenced.
If, however, the result should be otherwise, and they should be found to be
slaves, the suits having reference to the clandestine removal of the property
shall be dismissed.
Given on the third of the Idesof January, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.
7. The Emperor Constantine to Bassus, Prsetorian Prefect.
If, when a question as to status arises, the person alleged to be a slave is
accused of having stolen something from his master, it must first be considered
whether the reputed slave, being in servitude, believes that he has a right to
his freedom; or whether, while in the enjoyment of his freedom, an attempt is
being made to reduce him to slavery. When he who is in slavery demands his
freedom, it is proper that his condition should first be decided, and
afterwards the case of the theft should be investigated, if circumstances
demand it.
But where he who is alleged to be a slave is said to have stolen something,
whatever is proved to have been taken must be returned to him, provided he
furnishes proper sureties for its preservation. If, however, he should be
unable to furnish them, then it is proper that all the property in dispute
should be sequestrated, until the controversy is settled, but this should be
done in such a way that, if the party interested has no other resources,
whatever is necessary for the expenses of litigation and for the support of the
said alleged slave must be reserved from the said property to the amount that
the judge may decide to be reasonable.
But if the question with reference to status has not been raised, but someone
has stolen certain articles, and has been ordered to restore possession of them
to the owner for the purpose of avoiding the execution of the sentence, he will
be required to return the said property without asking for security, and then
the case involving his freedom shall proceed according to law.
TITLE XX. CONCERNING THE DETECTION OP COLLUSION.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Theodore.
As you state that your mother's slave has not only been guilty of committing
sexual intercourse with her, but, in addition to this dis-
graceful conduct, has, in collusion with her and under the pretext of false
captivity, planned to have himself declared freeborn by a competent judge, and
your mother did not grant him his freedom, but, as you assert, attempted to
establish his free birth by fraudulent representations, it is clear that he
still remains her slave; for as you say that she did not manumit him, the slave
does not appear to have become free, and cannot have recourse to the Rescript
of the Divine Pius, published with reference to captivity, nor could the mere
statement that you had consented confer upon him the right of freedom.
Published on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of
Diocletian, Consul for the fourth time, and Maximian, Consul for the third
time, 290.
2. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Milesius.
It is clearly stated by the Noninian Decree of the Senate that a freedman is
not permitted to change his status by means of a private contract, and a
penalty for collusion is fixed by it, and as well as a reward promised to the
informer.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the
Csesars.
TITLE XXI.
THE STATUS OF A DECEASED PERSON CANNOT BE BROUGHT IN QUESTION AFTER THE
EXPIRATION OF FIVE YEARS.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Nico.
A competent judge, after having been applied to, will examine the question of
prescription, and whether the patron of Domitia, who lived as a Roman citizen
until his death, can be proved to have died five years before the controversy
with reference to the property of the said woman arose; for her condition as a
freedwoman cannot be revoked on account of the alleged incapacity of the person
who manumitted her.
2. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Maximus.
If he who appointed you his heir is said to have been a slave on account of the
condition of his mother, and she died five years before any controversy on this
point aroise, there will be ground for prescription, as no inquiry can be
instituted with reference to his status without also investigating that of his
mother.
This rule only applies to cases where the persons concerned lived as Roman
citizens, without dispute, until the time of their death.
Published during the second Consulate of Antoninus and Geta, 206.
3. The Emperor Alexander to Olympias.
Although your husband, concerning whose condition a controversy has arisen, is
dead, the case shall be continued notwithstanding his death, on account of his
estate, and it must be decided by the court having jurisdiction over estates,
or property forming part of the same.
4. The Same Emperor to Martianus.
If he whom you allege to have been your slave, and who was manumitted by your
brother, and appointed his heir, lived as a Roman citizen after his
manumission, and you did not begin proceedings for the purpose of determining
his status within five years after his death, you understand that you cannot,
in violation of the provisions of the Decree of the Senate, raise any
controversy, either with reference to the heirs appointed by your brother, or
concerning the condition of those whom he intended to be free.
If, however, you instituted proceedings before that period of time has elapsed,
and claimed his peculiumin accordance with the legal formalities required, and
also brought suit to recover the slaves who were manumitted, you will not be
prevented from proceeding in accordance with the terms of the Edict.
Published on the fifth of the ... of June, during the Consulate of Modestus and
Probus, 229.
5. The Emperor Gordian to Severus.
The rule which has been established, namely, that no question can be raised
with reference to the condition of deceased persons after the lapse of five
years, does not, in any way, apply to an apparent emancipation which has not
been perfected by law.
6. The Emperors Valerius and Gallienus to Polla.
If your mother, while living, was generally believed to be freeborn, and five
years have elapsed since her death, you can plead the well-known prescription
on this point against the State and the minor heirs, if they should attempt to
raise a question as to your condition.
Moreover, a judicial inquiry must be instituted to determine whether or not she
passed as a freeborn woman when she died, and if it was found that she was not
always considered such, the general opinion at the time of her decease must be
taken into account.
Published on the sixth of the Idesof June, during the Consulate of Secularis
and Donatus, 261.
7. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Heliodorus.
If your father lived as a freeborn man until his death, and no controversy as
to whether he was a slave of the Treasury or not arose before the Governor of
the province, who is accustomed to decide questions of this kind, but the
matter was brought before the Imperial Procurator, who is not a competent judge
of such cases, and five years elapsed after your father's death, your condition
is protected by the prescription derived from the Decree of the Senate.
8. The Same Emperors to Theodora.
The right to claim the property composing the peculiumof your slave is not
barred by prescription, if the said property is in possession of another under
an unlawful title. For the Decree of the Senate which
was enacted to prevent the revoking of the condition of deceased persons does
not apply, if the decedent, having taken to flight, died a fugitive.
Given at Milan, on the tenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Diocletian and Maximian.
TITLE XXII.
CONCERNING THE PRESCRIPTION OF LONG TIME WHICH is PLEADED IN BEHALF OF AND NOT
AGAINST FREEDOM.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Mutianus.
The benefit of prescription based on long time cannot be claimed by anyone who,
for an extended period, has enjoyed freedom fraudulently obtained. Therefore,
as you acknowledge that you fled from the person whom you mentioned, you
understood that you are not in possession of liberty without being guilty of
fraud.
2. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Carcinus.
The possession of freedom lawfully acquired can be resolutely maintained by
prescription, since the favor with which it is regarded ---  and good reason as
well --- argue that prescription should benefit those who have been in possession
of liberty for the term of twenty years, without their right being challenged
by anyone seeking to disturb them, so that they may become both free, and Roman
citizens.
Given at Antioch, on the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Constantius,
Consul for the fourth time, and Maximus, Consul for the second time, 302.
3. Copy of the Imperial Letter of Constantine and Licinius addressed to
Dionysius, Temporarily in Charge of a Prefecture.
It is consistent with equity that the rights of freedom should, in no way, be
interfered with, solely on account of lapse of time, even if the term of sixty
years has passed.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Volusianus
and Annianus, 314.
TITLE XXIII.
CONCERNING THE PECULIUM OF HIM WHO HAS OBTAINED His FREEDOM.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Rufinus.
You should not forget that a great difference exists between the cases of those
who have been manumitted by persons who were living at the time, and those to
whom freedom has been bequeathed by will, as, in the first instance, they are
tacitly entitled to their peculium
if they were not specifically deprived of it, and in the second, the heirs will
have the right to it, unless it was expressly left to the manumitted slave.
This rule of law is perfectly clear.
TITLE XXIV.
CONCERNING THE ABOLITION OF THE CLAUDIAN DECREE OF THE SENATE.
1. The Emperor Justinian to Hermogenus, Master of the Offices.
As We think that during oar reign (when We have exerted ourselves so greatly in
favor of the liberty of Our subjects) it would be extremely wicked for certain
women to be deprived of their freedom, and that from the lust of unprincipled
men there should result a state of affairs which could only be caused by the
ferocity of enemies in violation of natural law, We desire that the Claudian
Decree of the Senate, as well as all denunciations and legal decisions having
reference to the same, shall hereafter be abolished, so that any woman who is
free and has been deceived, or rendered the victim of unfortunate affection,
shall not, for this or any other reason, be reduced to slavery, and the liberty
to which she was entitled by birth lost; and the worst dishonor tarnish the
glory of her kindred, as she may, perhaps, have relatives of distinguished
rank, and the master under whose control she comes may be inferior to her
relatives. This rule shall also apply to freedmen, for the principles by which
My reign is governed do not suffer that a person who once has obtained freedom
shall, under any circumstances, be reduced to slavery for such a cause.
But to prevent slaves and serfs from thinking that they can go unpunished for
the commission of such acts (and this is especially provided in the case of
serfs in order that their condition may not be gradually changed through their
marriage with free women), We order that if anything of this kind should be
perpetrated by either a slave or a serf, his master shall have full authority,
either in his own person or by the Governor of the province, to administer
proper punishment to the said slave or serf, and separate him from the said
woman. If he should fail to do this, he is hereby notified that his own loss
will be the result of his neglect.


TITLE XXV.
CONCERNING THE ABOLITION OF THE MERE CIVIL RIGHT OF ROMANS.

1. The Emperor Justinian to Julianus, Prsetorian Prefect.
With the intention of abolishing by this law a ridiculous example of
the subtlety of the ancient jurists, We shall not hereafter permit any
distinction to be made between owners who hold property merely by the
civil right of Romans, and those who hold it as part of their own
possessions, for the reason that We do not wish this distinction to
exist any longer, as the term "Ex jure Quiritium"[[1]] is enigmatical, is
nowhere seriously considered, and does not strictly apply to property,
but is a phase void of meaning, and superfluous, and by it the minds
of youths who are beginning the study of the law are bewildered, and
they are compelled to learn the useless provisions of ancient
enactments. Therefore, anyone who is the owner of a slave, or of any
other property which belongs to him, shall become its full and lawful
proprietor.


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% FOOTNOTE

[[1]] The Jus Quiritium was an indispensable requisite upon which the title to
property depended, and, in fact, the only one recognized in early times. Its
importance remained unimpaired after the exigencies of Roman life and
civilization had divided and subdivided the status of citizens and ownership
into various classes, and the application of its intricate and perplexing rules
seems to have puzzled some of the most learned jurists of both the Republic and
the Empire.

One man might sell an article to another, and if the usual formalities were not
observed, even if the price was paid and the property delivered, the complete
title did not pass ex jure Quiritium, and what was sold was considered to be
merely in bonis,or "among the effects" of the purchaser. This, of course, was
frequently productive of great hardship and injustice, so, by way of remedy, it
was provided by law that undisturbed possession for the term of a year in the
case of personal, and for two years in that of real property, perfected the
title of usucaption.

The civis optima jure was the Roman citizen par excellence, entitled to the Jus
Quiritium, as well as all other privileges implied by that distinguished
appellation, and to this invaluable right all other qualifications were rigidly
subordinated. Inheritance, the power of testamentary disposition, the exercise
of paternal authority, or patria potestas, marriage, capacity to hold public
office, usucaption, and, especially exemption from servitude, with the
unmolested enjoyment of the blessings of freedom, were all embraced in the Jus
Quiritium. --- ED.



TITLE XXVI.
CONCERNING USUCAPTION EITHER IN FAVOR OP THE PURCHASER OR ACQUIRED BY VIRTUE OF
THE TRANSACTION.

1. The Emperor Antoninus to Flavianus.
If your slaves have been stolen by persons who did not have the right to sell
them, you can bring suit to recover them, for they are not susceptible of
usucaption by the purchasers, as theft may be committed by an illegal sale.
Given on the day before the Idesof August, during the Consulate of Antoninus,
Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.

2. The Emperor Alexander to Marcellinus.
If the guardians, contrary to the intention of the deceased, sold the slaves
which he directed by his will to go to his heirs on account of their skill as
artisans, they cannot be acquired by usucaption.
Given on the fifth of the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of Julianus,
Consul for the second time, and Crispinus, 225.

3. The Same Emperor to Nepotilla.
If you purchased and now hold possession in good faith of the mother of him
with reference to whose condition you have instituted
legal proceedings, you can obtain by usucaption the child which she brought
forth afterwards while under your control, even if she herself formed part of
the stolen property.

4. The Same Emperor to Achilles.
If you establish that the other party gave his consent to the sale of the
female slave, and then rescinded the contract which he himself had ratified, he
shall not be heard. If, however, he cannot produce this proof, but can show
that the slave was purchased in good faith from a bona fidevendor, you can
acquire her by usucaption on the ground of lapse of time, and the attempt of
the claimant to hold the property will be of no avail.

5. The Emperor Gordian to Marinus.
When a possessor in bad faith sold a part of the property, the remainder which
he still retains can certainly, with all its profits, be recovered from him.
The portion which was sold, however, can only lawfully be demanded from the
possessor, where he knowingly bought what belonged to another, or when, as a
purchaser in good faith, he has not held it long enough to acquire usucaption.
Possession which has been lost by violence cannot be acquired by a purchaser
through usucaption, even though he bought it in good faith before it had again
come under the control of the owner.
6. The Emperor Philip to C&lius.
If it is proved that the property was pledged and afterwards sold by the
debtor, it is clear that, being, as it were, stolen, it cannot be acquired by
usucaption.
Without date or designation of Consulate.
7. The Same Emperor and Csesar to Compedius.
He who knowingly sells the slave of another without the consent of the owner
commits a theft, and this defect of title does not permit usucaption to take
place before the property is returned to the possession of the owner, even
though possession was obtained in good faith.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof February, during the Consulate of the Caesars,
248.
8. The Same Emperor and Csesar to Sevens.
Those who have a legal right to possession growing out of a compromise can
acquire property by usucaption.
9. The Same Emperor and Csesar to Gaius.
No kind of prescription will protect one who has purchased property sold by a
ward without the authority of his guardian, but if the ward is found to have
been benefited by the money of the purchaser, he will be barred by an exception
on the ground of bad faith if, after having arrived at puberty, he attempts to
rescind the contract by law on the ground that it is unjust.
Given during the Consulate of the Csesars.
TITLE XXVII.
CONCERNING THE USUCAPTION OF PROPERTY WHICH HAS BEEN DONATED.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Macedonius.
Whether the owner himself gave you the lands with reference to which you have
filed your petition, or whether you received them as a donation in good faith
from a person who was not their owner, you have acquired the right to them by
usucaption, and you cannot be deprived of what you have legally obtained.
Published on the fifth of the Ides of March, ....
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Capitonius.
There is no doubt that, in law, the rights of the master are not affected by
the donation of a female slave belonging to another, for a theft is committed
by the disposal of property without the consent of the owner, and usucaption of
such property cannot be acquired.
Ordered on the fifth of the Idesof April, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.
3. The Same Emperors and the Csesars to Rhodamts.
No one is permitted to revoke a donation which has been lawfully made, but it
is also true that a mistake cannot be defended on the ground of good faith.
This rule applies where ownership is claimed on the ground of usucaption.
TITLE XXVIII.
CONCERNING USUCAPTION IN THE CASE OF A DOWRY. 1. The Emperor Alexander to
Taurinus.
When movable property is given by way of dowry, even though none of it belongs
to another, if there is no defect in the title, and it is accepted in good
faith, it can be acquired by usucaption as part of the dowry.
TITLE XXIX.
CONCERNING USUCAPTION WITH REFERENCE To AN HEIR.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Theophilus.
As usucaption, in this instance, does not apply to the heir, you are advised
that neither your mother, whose heir you are, nor you, yourself, can acquire
the slaves referred to, by usucaption.
Published at Rome, on the seventh of the Kalends ofJuly, during the Consulate
of Lsetus and Cerealis.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Maurina.
It has been established that nothing can be acquired through usucaption by some
one acting as heir, when there are any proper heirs.
3. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Diodorus.
The possession of the property of an absent person by anyone acting in the
capacity of heir will not authorize usucaption, if the report of the death of
the said person is false.
4. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Serapion.
Usucaption cannot be claimed except under a lawful title, nor can it be taken
advantage of, nor can it avail the possessor or the heir, nor will the right of
the owner be affected by lapse of time, even if property belonging to another
is claimed under the pretext of its having formed part of an estate.
Given on the seventh of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of the
Csesars.
TITLE XXX. GENERAL RULES WITH REFERENCE TO USUCAPTION.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Savinus.
Anyone who holds property under a lease, although he holds it corporeally, is
not considered to possess it in person, but for the owner, as prescription
based on long possession cannot be acquired by either a tenant or a lessee.
Published on the seventh of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of
Alexander, Consul for the fifth time, and Marcellus, 227.
2. The Same Emperor to Onesima.
You say that sometime ago you purchased the slave with reference to whom you
petition, but, if you reflect, you will remember that property belonging to My
Treasury cannot be acquired by usucaption, and you are hereby notified that you
will be compelled to answer in any actions brought by My Treasury, nor can the
owership of the slave in question be acquired by you through usucaption, unless
he was not born of a female slave belonging to the Treasury.
Published during the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of Pompeianus and
Pelignus.
3. The Emperor Philip and the Csesar to Pantinus.
If Antiochus knowingly held your slave in bad faith, he cannot be acquired by
usucaption by his successor, even though he may possess him in good faith,
because of the original defect in the title.
TITLE XXXI.
CONCERNING THE TRANSFER OP THE RIGHT OP USUCAPTION AND THE ABOLITION OP THE
DISTINCTION OP RES MANCIPI AND RES NEC MANCIPI.
1. The Emperor Justinian to John, Praetorian Prefect.
As We, by Our care, have disposed of the name and substance of acquisitions ex
jure Quiritium,and have provided that ordinary prescription shall be valid
everywhere, whether it arises from possession for ten, twenty, or thirty years,
or even for a much longer time, it would be useless to admit the right of
usucaption only with reference to property situated in Italy, and to exclude it
from application to that situated in the provinces. Where, however, anyone has
had in his possession in good faith, for the term of two years, property
belonging to another, which is situated in Italy, the unfortunate owner of the
same shall lose his right to it, and shall be entitled to no recourse with
reference to said property, which was lost without the knowledge of the said
owner, for which reason there is nothing more unjust than for him, who is
ignorant of the fact, to be deprived of his possession in so short a time.
Therefore, We order by the present law, that where property situated in Italy
is either immovable, or is understood to be such, the term of usucaption shall
be extended (like that for a year), so that it will now run with those of ten,
twenty, or thirty years, and others of still longer duration, and that the
present limited period shall be abolished.
Moreover, as the ancients fixed the time for the acquisition of movable
property, or that which was capable of moving itself, or which was, in any way
retained (of course when held in good faith), whether situated in Italy or
anywhere else in the world, and allowed ownership to vest after possession for
a year, We consider that this should be amended, so that where anyone has had
possession in good faith of any movable property, or of any which was capable
of moving itself, either in Italy, or in any of the provinces, for the
continuous term of three years, he can acquire a legal title to the same, just
as if it had been acquired by usucaption, it being only observed that in all
such cases he must, in the first place, obtain it in good faith, just as is
required by a prescription of long time, and that the possession acquired by
any preceding lawful possessor shall be included in the term of ten, twenty, or
thirty years.
We decree that, in the case of movable property, the legal retention of the
preceding holder under a just right of possession, which he exercised over the
said property, shall not be interrupted by the fact that the subsequent holder
may have been aware that the property belonged to another, even though it was
obtained under a lucrative title. The time has been extended by this law with
reference to the usucaption of property which is the subject of the same, and
We have limited that of usucaption, productive of such loss and injury to
owners, and abolished the ancient practice of dividing property into
mancipi,and
nee mancipi,which is only in conformity with reason, so that a similar rule may
apply to all property and all localities, and useless ambiguities and
differences be finally disposed of.
Given at Constantinople, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof November, after the
Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes, 531.
TITLE XXXII.
CONCERNING THE ACQUISITION AND RETENTION OF POSSESSION.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus, and the Csesars, to Atticus.
It is established by the principles of public convenience, as well as by those
of law, that possession can be acquired by anyone without his knowledge,
through another who is free; and that usucaption will begin to run as soon as
he becomes aware of the fact.
Published on the sixth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Fuscus and Dexter, 226.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Maurus.
He who has caused you anxiety is not well informed when he asserts that you did
not obtain possession of the property which you purchased through an agent, as
you yourself allege that you have been in possession of the same for a long
time, and have, as the owner, transacted all the business relating to it; for
although transfer of the property whose possession has been delivered to you
was not mentioned in the instrument, you, nevertheless, in fact acquired it if
the vendor knew that you were in possession.
3. The Emperor Decius to Rufinus.
The possession of property donated by anyone to an infant is actually acquired,
for although the opinions of legal authorities differ on this point, still it
is more proper to hold that, in the meantime, possession is acquired by
delivery, although the infant is not capable of giving his full consent to the
transaction. For otherwise, in accordance with the opinion of the most learned
jurist Papinian, possession could not be acquired by the infant through his
guardian.
Published on the fifth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Decius,
Consul for the fifth time, and Gratus, 251.
4. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Nepotianus.
Although possession cannot be acquired by mere intention, still it can be
retained in this way. Therefore, if you have failed to cultivate your land for
a certain time, not with the intention of relinquishing possession, but only
because of fear, your rights cannot be prejudiced on account of the time which
has elapsed.
Published during the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Diocletian,
Consul for the fourth time, and Maximian, Consul for the third time, 290.
5. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Menno.
As no one can change his own title to possession, and you allege that the
tenant, without any external cause arising, allowed the farm which he unjustly
occupied to be sold, the Governor of the province, after having ascertained the
truth, will not permit you to be deprived of your right of ownership.
6. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Valerius.
If the Governor of the province should ascertain that your field or your
vineyard has been seized without good reason by the person whom you mentioned,
and that your claim is not barred by any prescription, he will not hesitate to
restore to you possession of the land with all its appurtenances.
Ordered during the Idesof April, during the Consulate of the above-mentioned
Emperors.
7. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Asyncritus.
Unjust possession does not confer a valid title upon the possessor. Wherefore
it is certain that anyone who takes possession of the land of another, without
the consent of the owner, or of his agent who has authority to transfer it,
cannot obtain legal ground for possession of the same.
Published on the fifth of the Idesof December, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors.
8. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Cyrillus.
It has been decided on the ground of the public welfare that the ownership, as
well as the possession of property, can be acquired through an agent, as the
two cannot be separated.
Published on the eighteenth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of the
Csesars.
9. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Sergius.
A purchaser cannot legally hold possession of property which he occupied on his
own responsibility by virtue of a genuine sale, and much less does he who,
falsely representing himself as the purchaser, for the reason that he lent
money without the obligation of a pledge and seized the land of another, have
just cause to retain it.
Published on the third of the Nonesof April, ....
10. The Emperor Constantine to Maternus.
No one can entertain any doubt that there are two grounds of possession, one
based on the law, and the other on the fact; and both of them are legal when
they are confirmed by the silence and want of opposition of all adversaries.
Where, however, a controversy arises, he cannot be considered the possessor
who, although he may have actual possession of the property, still his right to
occupy it having been questioned, a contest has been begun, and the case
brought into court.
Published on the eleventh of the Kalendsof February, under the Consulate of
Volusianus and Annianus, 314.
11. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Petroneus, Lieutenant of the Spains.
Previous defects of possession are transferred by former owners, and the
imperfection of the original proprietor passes to his successor.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of Csesarius
and Atticus, 397.
12. The Emperor Justinian to John, Praetorian Prefect.
We, intending to dispose of the question which has been brought to Our
attention by the works of the Sabinians, hereby order that, if either a slave,
an agent, a tenant, a lessee, or anyone else through whom we are permitted to
hold possession has, either through negligence or fraud, abandoned or delivered
to another the actual occupation of any property which he held, so that the
said third party may have ground for obtaining possession of the same, no
prejudice whatever can result to the owner, nor can any injury be inflicted
upon him by the malignity of his representative, but the latter, if he is free,
will be liable to suitable actions at law, and all loss must be made good by
him to the owner of said property, or to him with reference to whom he has
acted negligently or fraudulently.
But where possession has not yet been acquired by the said agent, tenant,
lessee, or slave, but the latter, through negligence or fraud, has failed to
secure it, then the person himself who appointed him shall suffer the damage
resulting from his bad selection of the individual directed to take possession
of the property, and attributable either to the evil design or negligence of
the latter.
We also order that the owner shall only be entitled to redress when he has
sustained any injury through the agency of him whom he appointed, but not when
he has failed to reap any benefit through his acts, as the ancient rule of law
which states that the condition of a master can, under no circumstances, be
made worse through the conduct of his slave, only applies when he suffers
actual loss, and not when he unsuccessfully attempts to obtain some advantage
for himself by means of his slave. In this instance, all legal rights of action
are reserved for the owner of the property, or for him who appointed any of the
above-mentioned persons to hold possession, as against the latter, if he is
entitled to the same under the law.
TITLE XXXIII.
CONCERNING THE PRESCRIPTION OP LONG TIME BASED UPON OCCUPANCY FOR TEN OR TWENTY
YEARS.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Julian, Prsstorian Prefect.
If, after the question of possession has been disposed of, the ownership of the
property passes in good faith to another, and remains
in his possession without any interruption for the term of twenty years, the
party then in possession should not be disturbed, but if the latter does not
take advantage of the occupancy of the former owner, there is nothing to
prevent him from being disturbed by a dispute as to the title. If, however, the
right of the former possessor was disputed, even though he remained in
possession for a long time without interruption, he will, nevertheless, not be
able to avail himself of prescription based on long time.
This rule also must be observed with reference to property belonging to the
State.
Extract from Novel 119, Chapter VII. Latin Text.
Where a possessor in bad faith alienates property, prescription based upon long
time will not apply if the true owner is ignorant of his rights, and the
alienation has been made, but his defence will be valid in case he acted in
good faith, and the period of thirty years has elapsed. But where he who knew
that the property belonged to him did not prosecute his claim in court within
ten years, if the parties were present, and within twenty if they wer.e absent,
the possessor being protected by prescription, will be entitled to hold the
property.
Extract from the Same Novel, Chapter Vill. Latin Text.
Where, however, one of the parties was present during certain years, and absent
during others, there must be added to the ten years out of the other ten as
many as he was absent.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars.
The prescription of long time can usually only benefit those who, after having
obtained possession of property in good faith, have enjoyed it continuously,
without its being interrupted by legal proceedings.
Published on the fifth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Maximus, Consul for the second time, and Aquilinus, 286.
3. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Antoninus.
If the vineyard which your mother gave to your step-father by way of dowry
belonged to you, and no prescription has arisen oh account of lapse of time,
the Governor of the province must cause it to be restored to you.
4. The Same Emperors and Csssars to Hermogenes.
Long-continued possession which has been acquired only by the right of
succession, and without any legal title can, for this reason alone, be of no
advantage in claiming prescription.
Given on the fourth of the Idesof April, during the Consulate of the Emperors.
5. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Sotericus.It is a perfectly clear rule of
law that anyone who claims ownership from one who is indebted to some mistake
alone for his possession of
certain property to which he holds a legal title cannot be excluded by
prescription of long time.
Ordered on the eleventh of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of the
Emperors.
6. Extract from a Letter of the Same Emperors and Csesars to Primosus, Governor
of Syria.
If the sale was fraudulently and deceitfully made, even though the parties were
over twenty-five years of age, the time which has elapsed cannot confirm it, as
the prescription of long time does not apply to contracts entered into in bad
faith.
7. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Anthea.
The loss of documents does not legally prejudice the right of persons whose
title is protected by long possession, nor can the evil designs of another
disturb security acquired by long-continued possession.
Given on the day before the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors.
8. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Celsus.
If he against whom you petitioned alleges that the slaves of your late mother
belonged to him as her adopted son, the fact of an illegal adoption is not
alone sufficient to enable him to acquire the ownership of the property, for
which reason you will not be prevented from claiming the slaves, without being
under any apprehension that prescription can be successfully pleaded against
you, if he, against whom you have filed your petition, only obtained possession
of the said slaves under the title above mentioned.
9. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Demosthenes.
A purchaser in good faith, who pleaded an exception against the prescription of
ten years advanced by the other party who was present during that time, from
the beginning of the controversy, and who proved this after the plaintiff had
disclosed his claim, has shown that he has a right to legal possession, and
very properly asks to be released from liability.
10. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Rheginus.
The prescription of long time cannot benefit those who have obtained possession
in good faith, after being in default in joining issue, because the time should
be reckoned after legal proceedings have been instituted.
11. The Emperor Justinian to Menna, Prsetorian Prefect.
We directly order that, with reference to prescription of long time, and which
is based upon occupancy for either ten or twenty years, that where anyone is
proved to have held possession of property for either ten or twenty years,
which property has been acquired by
donation, or by any other lucrative title, and the time it was occupied by the
former possessor is added to that during which he held it, he will undoubtedly
be entitled to the above-mentioned prescription of long time, nor can he be
excluded on the ground that he acquired the property by a lucrative title.
Given during the Kalendsof June, under the Consulate of Our Lord Justinian,
528.
12. The Same Emperor to John, Praetorian Prefect.
Three difficulties arose among the ancient authorities concerning prescription
based upon long time: the first, with reference to where the property was
situated; the second, relating to the persons, whether the presence of one or
of both should be required; and the third, whether the claimant as well as the
possessor should be in the same province, or even in the same city where the
property was in dispute; and We shall include all these matters in the present
law, so that no doubt may remain on the subject. Therefore We decree that, in
cases of this kind, the domicile of the claimant as well as that of the
possessor shall be taken into account, so that he who raised the question of
the ownership or of the hypothecation of the property, as well as he who is in
possession, must reside in the same place, that is to say, in the same
province. For We think that We should decide in favor of considering the
province rather than the city as the domicile of the parties, and if both of
them have their domicile in the same province, the case will be considered as
having arisen between them while present, and any longer prescription than that
of ten years will be excluded.
Moreover, with reference to the doubt arising concerning the property, there
shall be no distinction whether it is situated in the same province, or in a
neighboring one, or whether it is situated beyond seas or even in a far distant
country.
If, however, both parties should not reside in the same province, but one
should have his domicile in one province, and the other in another, then the
case will be one as between absent parties, and the prescription of twenty
years shall apply, for there is nothing to prevent the action with reference to
the property, whether it is situated in one province or in another, from being
brought in a provincial court, and still less to prevent this being done in
this Most Flourishing City. For what advantage would it be for possession to be
held in one province or another, as the right to claim property is incorporeal,
and wherever it is situated, the ownership of the same can revert to the owner
or the creditor? Hence our ancestors, with great shrewdness, and with a species
of divine inspiration, established the rule that rights of action existed
wherever the claims or^ the property itself could be situated.
Therefore, after the promulgation of this law, let no one doubt what should be
decided, whether the parties are present or absent; for if the occupant
acquired possession in good faith in the beginning, and the domicile of both
parties is ascertained, then let the question
be determined, no matter where the property may be situated, without taking
into consideration either knowledge or ignorance, in order that no other
embarrassing occasion for doubt may arise.
The same rule must be observed if the property is not attached to the soil, but
is incorporeal and consists merely of rights, as, for instance, usufructs and
other servitudes.
TITLE XXXIV.
To WHAT CASES PRESCRIPTION OF LONG TIME DOES NOT
APPLY.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Marcellina.
If he to whom you have given your land for the purpose of cultivation
afterwards, through the agency of your step-mother, secretly removed the
documents by which it could be proved that the ownership of the land belonged
to you, he cannot defend himself on the ground of long possession alone.
2. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Dionysius.It is superfluous to have
recourse to the prescription of long time in matters relating to the ownership
of slaves.
3. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Apollinarus.
One of two joint-owners, who has possession of all the common undivided
property, cannot plead prescription of long time to prevent the other joint-
owner from claiming his share of the property, or for bringing suit in
partition; as neither the action in partition, nor that brought for the
division of property owned in common, is barred by the prescription of long
time.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of the Csesars.
4. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Libroa.
The prescription of long time does not injure those who are claiming an estate.
None of the provisions of this law, however, shall prejudice the rights of
those who do not hold possession of property which belongs, or has belonged to
an estate, either as heirs or possessors, but have obtained it by purchase,
gift, or some other title, as the succession cannot be demanded by them.
Given on the third of the Idesof September ....
5. The Same Emperors and Caesars to Hosimus.
If you have cared for a boy slave who had not been abandoned, but had been
wounded by the enemy, and you did this at your own expense (as you assert)
believing him to be free, you cannot legally plead the prescription of long
time to prevent his master from recovering him, provided he tenders you the
amount which you have legitimately expended in his behalf.
TITLE XXXV.
IN WHAT CASES PRESCRIPTION OF LONG TIME CANNOT BE PLEADED.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Venuleius.
The time passed in an expedition cannot be included in pleading prescription
against a claim for land, if it can be legally established.
Given on the sixth of the Nonesof July, under the Consulate of Julian and
Crispus, 225.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian and the Caesars to Aurelius, Chief
Physician.
As you assert that, during your absence, those of whom you complain seized your
property, and it is clear that you could not leave Our retinue on account of
your profession as a physician, Our Praetorian Prefect, after summoning all the
parties interested, will decide between you. It is not necessary for you to
request that prescription based on lapse of time shall not be pleaded against
you, since the fact that you were lawfully absent, and engaged in the public
service, will protect you from damage in this respect.
Published at Nicea, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof March, during the
Consulate of Maximus, Consul for the fifth time, and Aquilinus, 286.
3. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Numidius, Governor of Italy.
It is well known that time passed in minority cannot be included in
prescription, for the latter only begins to run when the owner of the property
attains his majority.
Published on the fourth of the Idesof September, during the Consulate of
Diocletian, Consul for the fourth time, and Maximian, Consul for the third
time, 290.
4. The Same Emperors and Caesars to Crispinus.
If uninterrupted possession has continued without dispute, you have a right to
plead prescription. We, however, decree that it shall never be valid against
persons who are absent on business for the State, and especially where this
takes place unexpectedly.
Published on the sixth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of
Ambalianus and Asclepiodotus, 292.
5. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Januarius.
It is a positive rule of law that prescription cannot be pleaded in suits
growing out of loans for consumption, or for use, or deposits, legacies,
trusts, guardianships, or in any other personal action.
Ordered on the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of the above-mentioned
Emperors.
6. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Dulcius.Having been taken captive by the
enemy, and returned under the right of postliminium,you have no reason to
apprehend that the pos-
session of your adversary based upon long time can be legally pleaded in a
direct action in rem,or in any other which you may bring for the purpose of
recovering your ownership of the property, as an act of this kind is of no
avail against those who, for any reason, have the right to invoke the aid of
restitution.
7. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Cassander.
Possessors of property in good faith are protected by prescription against
those who have been present for ten years, or have been absent for twenty. If
the relief of restitution is demanded by anyone with reference to a share of
the plaintiffs, as much of the time should be deducted as would usually be
counted in case anything had been done, and the remainder should be computed,
which is reasonable.
8. The Emperor Justinian to Menna, Prsetorian Prefect.
We order that, exclusively in the case of soldiers who are engaged in
expeditions only, that time which has elapsed during the expedition shall be
pleaded in opposition to prescription, but this privilege shall not be enjoyed
by them, so far as the time which they may have passed either at home, or in
other places, while they were not in active service, is concerned.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of
Decius, 529.
TITLE XXXVI.
WHERE PRESCRIPTION is PLEADED AGAINST A CREDITOR.
1. The Emperor Gordian to Veneria.
Unbroken silence is strengthened by the prescription of long time, and renders
an action brought by creditors for the recovery of a pledge of no effect, when
the debtors, or those who have succeeded to their rights, have possession of
the property pledged. When, however, prescription of long time is pleaded by a
possessor against his creditor, a personal action will lie in favor of the
latter against the debtor.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Marcella.
If you were not the heir of a debtor, but obtained the property as a donation,
and have had lawful possession of the same for the term of twenty years, the
rule of law does not permit a personal action to be brought against you (for
the reason that you did not succeed the debtor), nor can you be deprived of
land given in pledge after the necessary time has elapsed, even when
prescription based upon ten years occupancy can be pleaded against creditors,
who have been present, a principle which has not only been established by Our
Rescripts but also by those of the Emperors, Our predecessors.
TITLE XXXXXXVVIIII..CONCERNING THE PRESCRIPTION OF FORTY YEARS.
1. The Emperor Constantine to Orphitus.
It is well known that no question can be raised by the Treasury with reference
to property which has no owner, after continuous occupancy of the same for the
term of forty years.
2. The Emperor Zeno to ^Eneas, Count of Private Affairs.We order that when
persons who have purchased any property, whether it be movable, immovable, or
capable of moving itself, or which consists of rights of action, or of any
other rights whatsoever, from Our Most Sacred Treasury, or, where any movable
or immovable property, or any capable of moving itself, or any rights of
action, or any other rights whatsover, have been given to them by the
munificence of the Emperor, they shall be entitled to all the privileges to be
obtained from the divine laws of the Emperor Leo, of illustrious memory, and
from Our own, as well, with reference to certain estates, in preference to
purchasers, and that all of them shall enjoy benefits or privileges of this
description, just as if they had already been, or may hereafter be granted, in
the case of individual property or inheritances.
Nor can any suits for the ownership of property, or on account of its
hypothecation, or any civil, praetorian, or personal action based upon laws or
Imperial Constitutions, or any other statutory provisions whatsoever (even
though they may not be expressly enumerated in the present law), be brought
against the purchasers of the property aforesaid, whether they already are, or
may subsequently become such, or against those who, in the case of property of
this kind, have been the recipients of Our generosity, or who may become such
hereafter. Permission is, however, given to those who desire to do so, to
institute proceedings against Our Treasury within the term of forty years, but
after the said term has elapsed, they are advised that they will not be allowed
to bring any actions whatsoever against it.
(1) With a view to the consideration of the rights of purchasers of property
from the Treasury, We decree that whenever a person competent to sell such
property states in writing that he has received the price of the same,
purchasers who have paid money shall not, under such circumstances, be molested
on the ground of non-payment, nor shall the said purchasers be required to
prove that the price was paid, even though they may not have obtained the
security of a receipt for the same. But, as it is in the power of him who
receives the price not to give a receipt at a time when it was not paid, so it
is proper that purchasers should enjoy perfect security by the payment of the
price in this manner, and not be obliged to furnish other proof, as has already
been stated.
3. The Emperor Justinian to Florus, Count of Private Affairs.It was very
properly provided by the Emperor Zeno, of Divine Memory, in the case of fiscal
alienations, that persons who obtain
property from Our Treasury by way of donation, purchase, or any other kind of
alienation --- if anything should arise to impugn the validity of the contract,
either on the ground of eviction, or to produce any other annoyance with
reference to the ownership or hypothecation of the property --- shall not suffer
any loss; and that no suits can be brought against the purchasers, or those who
have received the property by way of donation, or who have possession of the
same under any other title; but they can only be brought against the Treasury
within the term of four years, which, having elapsed, no action will lie
against the Treasury.
We know that this rule is constantly observed in fiscal alienations, but that
it is not observed in the case of property acquired from private resources of
the Emperor, and not from the funds of the Treasury. This is unreasonable, for
why should such a difference be established when everything is understood to
belong to the Emperor, and what is alienated is derived from his private
property, or from that belonging to the Treasury?
In like manner, when anything is alienated by the Empress, why should it not
enjoy the same privilege? Our stewards, by whom We are accustomed to administer
Our estates when anything is sold, are required to attach to the bills of sale
agreements with reference to eviction, and others having a view to private
convenience, and to acknowledge obligations of this kind in instruments
relating to alienations, as well as those concerning changes or compromises,
where such transactions take place. This also refers to those who do not
acknowledge the Imperial Majesty, nor realize what a distance exists between
private fortune and Imperial rank, but attempt to injure and cause loss to Our
stewards, by whom the affairs of the Imperial household are conducted.
For the purpose of correcting all these things, We order by this general rule,
which shall be valid for all time, that every alienation proceeding from the
Imperial Palace, whether it is made by Us or by Her August Majesty the Empress,
or by those who may hereafter be worthy of the Imperial Name --- whether the
property has already been alienated, or may be alienated hereafter --- shall remain
irrevocable; whether the transfer has been made by Us in person, or by Our
agents in pursuance of Our authority. And let no one be so bold as to bring
suit against those who acquire such property under any title whatsoever,
whether the said property be movable, immovable, or capable of moving itself,
or whether it consists of incorporeal rights or civil privileges, or think that
there is any way open for him to molest them, but every avenue shall be closed,
and every method of procedure, and every hope of the tolerance of such
malignancy, shall be excluded.
They shall, however, have the right to bring actions in remor hypothecary
actions against Us within the term of four years, as they can do against the
Treasury, if they think that they are entitled to such actions; and such a
cause shall proceed by Our order and be decided in the proper manner. When,
however, the said term of four
years has elapsed, no one will be entitled to bring any suit whatsoever against
Us. Therefore, because We know that not only We, Ourselves, but also Our
Illustrious Consort, the Empress, has already given, sold, and alienated much
property in other ways, and that Our liberality, as well as that of Our
Illustrious Consort, the Empress, has been, above all, displayed with reference
to churches, hospitals, poorhouses, as well as bishops, monks, and innumerable
other persons, We order that they also shall hold by an indisputable title what
they have acquired, and that no proceeding shall be instituted against them,
and that, within the term of four years from the present time, they shall all
have a right to bring suit against Us to recover said property; but they are
hereby notified that, after the said term of four years has expired, they shall
be entitled to no recourse against Us. For as Imperial rank is entitled to many
privileges, all Imperial donations shall be irrevocable, without being
recorded, and the title to any property which the Illustrious Emperor may have
given to his August Consort temporarily, or during marriage, or which he
himself may have received from his Illustrious Consort, the Empress, as a
donation, shall immediately become complete, without being subject to
confirmation by time, and this shall be considered an Imperial privilege. For
why should those who, giving their advice and their efforts, toil day and night
for the benefit of the entire world, not enjoy privileges becoming their rank?
Therefore, Your Excellency, as well as all Our other judges, shall cause these
provisions to be observed which We have promulgated for the honor of the
Imperial Name, and for the security of those who have experienced Our bounty,
and which shall be valid from the time when, by the Divine Will, We assumed the
Imperial insignia.
Given at Constantinople, on the fifth of the Kalendsof December, after the
fifth Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes, 581.
TITLE XXXVIII.
THE CLAIM TO PROPERTY BELONGING TO THE CROWN, OR
TO THAT BELONGING TO THE TEMPLES, SHALL NOT BE
BARRED BY PRESCRIPTION.
1. The Emperors Valens and Valentinian to Probus, Praetorian Prefect of Gaul.
It has repeatedly been ordered that freedmen and serfs attached to the Imperial
domain, as well as their offspring and other descendants, who have left Our
land and engaged in other different occupations, shall be restored to Our
estates and stripped of any dignity which they may have fraudulently obtained,
and shall not be permitted to avail themselves of any prescription.
2. The Emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius to Dexter, Count of
Private Affairs.
We order that all lands held by tenants or under emphyteusis, and which are the
property of the State or the Emperor, or belong
173
to the sacred temples, or have been sold in any province, or alienated in
pursuance of any other contract, by persons who had possession of them
wrongfully and contrary to law, shall be restored; and that no prescription can
be pleaded against their restoration, so that those who have purchased them
legally cannot demand the repayment of the price of the same.1
Given at Constantinople, on the fifth of the Nonesof July, during the Consulate
of Valentinian, Consul for the fourth time, and Eutro-pius, 387.
3. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Paulus, Count of the Imperial Domain.
If anyone should have the boldness to take possession of land forming part of
the Imperial Domain, its rights shall be recovered in accordance with the
provisions of the ancient census. Therefore Your Highness should not pay any
more attention to rescripts which have been fraudulently obtained than to
prescription of long time, or to the new census; and hence you must restore
everything which has been taken away to its proper place, for temporary
possession or a new return cannot abolish the privilege enjoyed by Our
property.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Arcadius,
Consul for the fifth time, and Honorius, Consul for the third time, 396.
TITLE XXXIX.
CONCERNING THE PRESCRIPTION OP THIRTY AND FORTY
YEARS.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Ariana.
As you allege that, during your absence, certain persons who coveted your lands
purposely caused them to be sold at a low price, by the Governor of the
province, under the pretext of the collection of taxes, if the lawful time from
the day of the sale within which you can claim said land has passed, the
Governor of the province shall take cognizance of your case, and shall decide
whatever the law directs.
If, however, the time prescribed by law from the day of the public sale has not
yet elapsed, the judge, having examined your allegations, shall decide what the
nature of the case requires, being aware that if he should ascertain the sale
to be unjust, the price paid under a fraudulent contract of this kind must be
returned to the purchaser, in accordance with the tenor of the Imperial
Constitutions.
2. The Emperor Valens and Valentinian to Volusianus, Prastorian Prefect.
Improper action is taken with reference to the owners of land when such a
precarious title is granted to possessors that they cannot be molested for any
cause after the lapse of forty years, as the law
1 "Nullum tempus aut locus occurrit regi." --- ED.
of Constantine provides that no other title whatever shall be required by
possessors who have held property for themselves but not for others. It is
established that those shall not be designated possessors who occupy property
on the condition of the payment of a certain fixed sum as rent. Therefore, no
one who has obtained possession as a lessee, by retaining the property of
another for a long time, can obtain the ownership of the same for himself; for
otherwise, the owners might lose the land which they have leased, or be obliged
to exclude valuable tenants, or to publicly proclaim their ownership every
year. Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of
Valens and Valentinian, 365.
3. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Asclepiodotus, Pree-torian Prefect.
The right to bring special actions in rem,or general personal actions, cannot
be extended beyond the term of thirty years. When any property or right is
claimed, or anyone has a suit or a prosecution of any kind brought against him,
the prescription of thirty years can be pleaded against the plaintiff.
The same law is applicable in the case of a person who endeavors to recover
property which has been pledged or hypothecated, not from his debtor, but from
another who has had it in his possession for a long time; therefore, where
actions have not been brought within thirty year's from the time in which this
could be done, they cannot longer be prosecuted. Nor will it be sufficient to
obtain a special and favorable answer, even though this be secured by personal
application and petition to the Emperor, or even to state this in court,
unless, after the Imperial Rescript has been mentioned, or the demand formally
made, an agreement has been effected through a bailiff, nor can a defence based
on infirmity of sex, or on absence, or service in the army, be set up in
opposition to this law, but only on the ground of the minority of the
defendant, even though he may be represented by his guardian.
For, after persons who have been subject to the care of a curator become of
age, their rights, as well as those of others, must necessarily be dependent
upon possession for the term of thirty years. Rights of action, considered
perpetual, are extinguished by the prescription cf thirty continuous years, but
not those which were limited in former times to a certain term.
We decree that, after this period has elapsed, no one shall have the power to
proceed, even if he should attempt to excuse himself by professing ignorance of
the law.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Victor.
4. The Emperor Anastasius to Matronianus, Prsetorian Prefect.
We, desiring to permanently dispose of every opportunity to cause injury, do
decree that all prescriptions having reference to time, which are derived from
the ancient laws or from Imperial decrees, shall
endure in full force, just as if they had been specifically and definitely
enumerated in this law; and those who now have a right to avail themselves of
them, or may in the future acquire such a right, shall, in accordance with
their tenor, be able to do so for all time hereafter.
And wishing to supplement what may have been omitted, either in words or
meaning in prescriptions formerly in force, We order, by this law (which shall
be valid for all time) that if there should be any contract or action which has
not been expressly provided for by the rules governing the prescriptions above
mentioned which, by means of either an accidental or an intentional
interpretation, appears to afford means to evade the restrictions imposed by
the prescriptions aforesaid, it shall be included in this Our most salutary
law, and it shall, unquestionably, be extinguished after the lapse of forty
years, and no private or public action relating to any cause or person which
has been extinguished by the silence of the aforesaid forty years shall be
brought.
Anyone, however, who, under some title which has been undisputed during the
above-mentioned period, has had possession of property without any judicial
controversy having been raised with reference to it, still holds the same,
shall remain secure in its ownership; and any slave who, after the expiration
of said term, without having his case submitted to judicial investigation, has
obtained an advantage of this kind, shall become free under the provisions of
this most salutary law.
Given at Constantinople, on the third of the Kalendsof . . . , during the
Consulate of Olybrius.
5. The Same Emperor to Thomas, Prsetorian Prefect of Illyria.
We do not permit the prescription of forty years to be pleaded by those who are
called to the office of decurion, but We order that they shall always be-
compelled to remain in the civil condition in which they were born. For the law
which We have promulgated applies to other conditions, and former constitutions
are not repealed by the said new law, which plainly directs that decurions and
their children shall be returned to their former status without reference to
any prescription whatsoever.
6. The Same Emperor to Leo, Prsetorian Prefect.
We, having ascertained that certain persons have attempted to apply the
Imperial Constitutions which treats of the prescription of forty years to the
prejudice of the payment of public contributions, alleging that if anyone had
failed to pay anything for that time or longer, or had paid less than he
should, he would be released from liability for taxes, and that they cannot be
collected or he be compelled to pay them, as an attempt of this kind is well
known to be contrary to both the spirit and the letter of Our law, We,
therefore, order that those who have had possession of any property
continuously for the term of forty years, without any lawful interruption,
shall not, in any way, be deprived of the possession or ownership of the said
property, but that they can be compelled to pay any public tax imposed upon
them by the civil law, and that no prescription of any time can be pleaded in a
case of this description.
7. The Emperor Justin to Archelaus, Praetorian Prefect.
As it is a well-known rule of law that an hypothecary action is extinguished
after the lapse of thirty years, so far as foreign possessors of the encumbered
property are concerned, if the silence is not interrupted as provided by law,
that is to say, by an agreement, or where the incapacity of one of the parties
who has not arrived at the age of puberty is demonstrated, he will have
recourse against the debtors or heirs of the possessors, either immediate or
remote, who will not be entitled to take advantage of any prescription.
We have taken occasion to amend this law, to prevent possessors of this kind
from being subject to constant apprehension.
(1) Therefore, We order that the right to bring the hypothecary action on the
ground of property remaining in the hands of debtors or their heirs shall not
be extended beyond the term of forty years within which said action can be
brought, unless some agreement has been made, or the minority of the party
enjoying the right is involved (as has already been stated), so that the
difference existing between the actions brought against the debtor or his heir,
and against strangers, for the recovery of the property, shall only consist in
the number of years, but that the two shall be similar in all other respects.
With reference to personal actions, those rules shall be observed which have
been prescribed by former constitutions.
(2) But as the question frequently arose in judicial controversies as to
whether a creditor claiming prior rights could, after the lapse of thirty
years, molest a subsequent creditor, who had possession of the land under
hypothecation, the latter being the representative of the debtor, and holding
possession like him, We hav^e considered it necessary to dispose of it. Hence,
We order that while a common debtor is living, the prescription of thirty years
cannot be pleaded against a prior creditor, but that there will be ground for
the prescription of forty years, because, while the debtor is living, the prior
creditor should reasonably think that the subsequent creditor holds possession
of the property for and in the name of the common debtor. And therefore, if the
debtor should die, the subsequent creditor having possession in his name can,
with good reason, plead prescription of thirty years.
In accordance with this distinction, the computation of time should be made in
such a way that the prescription of the subsequent creditor will date from the
death of the debtor. If, however, he should wish to add the time during which
he had possession after the death of the debtor to that which he had during the
lifetime of the latter, or while the common debtor himself had possession, then
the rights conferred by prescription of forty years must be considered, and the
subsequent creditor must show that he had possession for a term sufficient to
complete the period of forty years, by which the debtor himself would have been
able to exclude him, in his turn.
(3) The same rule must be observed in the computation of time, where the
subsequent creditor is ready to tender payment of the debt to the prior
creditor, and the latter attempts to bar him by pleading the prescription of
long possession.
(4) It is more than manifest that, in all contracts in which either promises or
agreements are entered into subject to any condition, depending upon a fixed,
or indefinite time, after the condition has been fulfilled, or the certain or
uncertain time has elapsed, the prescription of thirty or forty years, which is
pleaded in personal or hypothecary actions, begins to run.
The result of this is that in marriages, in which the restitution of the dowry
is provided for, or in the case of ante-nuptial donations, in which it is
customary to specify the indefinite date of death or divorce, after the
dissolution of marriage, the prescription which can be pleaded in personal as
well as in hypothecary actions, begins to
run.
(5) Moreover, there is no doubt that if any one of those to whom something is
due holds property which has been hypothecated to him without the employment of
violence, an interruption of prescription takes place by means of this
possession, if less than thirty or forty years has passed; and much more is
this the case, if the interruption was caused by an agreement, as such
possession bears a resemblance to the joinder of issue.
If one of the debtors should give his creditor additional security for the
purpose of securing his obligation, the time of the abovementioned prescription
will be considered as having been interrupted, so far as the original security
is concerned, and the prescription in both personal and hypothecary actions
will run from the date of the novation; for it would be dishonorable for the
debtor to dispute this, in order to avoid his liability to his creditor, after
having given him a second security for the former debt.
(6) With reference to promises, legacies, and other obligations which require
the giving or payment of something every year, or every month, or at any other
prescribed date, it is clear that the times of the above-mentioned prescription
should not be computed from the date of such an obligation, but from the
beginning of each year, or each month, or from any other time which may be
specified.
Moreover, permission should not be given to anyone who has held any property
under emphyteutical right, for the term of forty, or any other number of years,
who alleges that he is entitled to ownership of the said property, to acquire
the same on account of the time which has elapsed; as what is granted under
emphyteutical right must always remain in the same condition, since the lessee,
or the agent who has charge of the business of another, is obliged to restore
the said property to the owner, if he wishes him to do so, even though he may
allege that he is not obliged to surrender it, and is entitled to possession of
the same by prescription, after the expiration of a certain
time.
Given during the Kalendsof December, ....
8. The Emperor Justinian to Menna, Prsetorian Prefect.
When anyone has held possession of any property which was obtained in good
faith by purchase, agreement, donation, or any other contract, for ten or
twenty years, and has acquired for himself the right of prescription based on
long time, against the owners of said property, or creditors who claim that
they are entitled to it through hypothecation, and he afterwards loses
possession of said property by accident, We order that he shall be entitled to
an action to recover the same. If anyone carefully examines the ancient laws,
he will ascertain that they authorize this.
(1) If, however, anyone should cease to hold possession of property, where the
owner or someone who has a lien on it has been barred by prescription of thirty
or forty years, We direct that the abovementioned relief shall be afforded him,
not indiscriminately, but in moderation; and if anyone should, in the
beginning, have held the said property in good faith, he can avail himself of
the same advantage.
But where he acquired it in bad faith, he shall, for this reason, be considered
unworthy, so that he who was the original owner of the property, or held it
under a pledge and was barred by the effect of the above-mentioned
prescription, can acquire the benefit of possession for himself, in the
capacity of a new possessor.
If, however, he had no right to such property at any time, then the original
owner, or the creditor who had possession of it under hypothecation, shall,
with their heirs, be permitted to recover it from the unlawful possessor,
notwithstanding that the former possessor has already excluded him by means of
the prescription of thirty or forty years, unless the illegal possessor himself
is protected by the prescription of thirty or forty years, to be computed from
the time when the former possessor, who evicted him, lost possession of said
property.
(2) We, however, decree that these rules shall only apply to possessors who
have obtained control of the property without violence, for if anyone should
forcibly remove it, the former possessor shall, by all means, be entitled to it
without any opposition.
(3) If, anyone, however, should obtain the property, not by violence, but by a
judicial decision, he shall only be responsible for the time when the former
possessor was absent, and was summoned to court, and he, like others entitled
to the ownership of the property, shall be permitted, within a year, to take
the said property if he presents himself, and offers security for the conduct
of the case, and to obey the decision with reference to the matter in
litigation.
(4) We decree that the prescription of thirty or forty years shall, in the case
of contracts in which interest is promised, begin to run from the time when the
debtor has failed to pay it.
Given at Constantinople, on the third of the Idesof December, during the
Consulate of our Lord the Emperor Justinian.
9. The Same to Demosthenes, Prsetorian Prefect.Certain persons frequently call
their opponents into court, and in the prosecution of judicial proceedings are
not able to bring their cases to a definite conclusion, and as the conditions
of life are subject to constant variation, they, in the meantime, having
preserved silence either on account of the superior power of their adversaries,
or their own weakness, or for innumerable other reasons which can neither be
mentioned nor enumerated, appear to have forfeited their rights, because, after
the last trial of the case, the term of thirty years has elapsed, and having
been opposed by a prescription of this kind see their property transferred to
others, which in former times caused them much sorrow and with good reason, as
they had no remedy.
We, desiring to correct this, do not permit such a prescription based upon the
lapse of thirty years to be pleaded in a case of this kind, but even though a
personal action was brought in the first place, We authorize it to be extended
to the fortieth year, as he who is in the beginning absolutely silent as to his
rights does not resemble him who filed his complaint, came into court, and went
to trial, but for some cause or other was prevented from finishing his case.
And, although the plaintiff himself may have died, We decree that he can leave
the conduct of his action to his posterity, and that his heirs or successors
shall be permitted to conduct it to a conclusion, and not be in any way barred
by the prescription of thirty years.
The period available (that is to say, the term of forty years), We decree shall
be computed from the time when the last judicial investigation took place,
after both parties failed to proceed.
TITLE XL.
CONCERNING THE ABOLITION OF THE PRESCRIPTION OF A
YEAR AFFECTING CONTRACTS MADE IN ITALY, AND THE
DIFFERENT TERMS, EXCEPTIONS, PRESCRIPTIONS, AND
INTERRUPTIONS OF THE SAME.
1. The Emperor Justinian to Julian, Prsetorian Prefect.
With reference to the exception of a year which is applicable to contracts made
in Italy, such an enormous mass of controversies has arisen in all the
tribunals that it is difficult to enumerate and impossible to explain them;
for, in the first place, it has been attended with so many technicalities and
difficulties that it is necessary for many things to agree in order for it to
take effect. Then some authorities have interpreted the said period in such a
liberal way that it can be extended as long as ten years; others have held that
it should be limited to five, and in Our time, different constructions have
been made by judges with reference to this computation; hence this exception
does not readily produce any effect upon litigation.
Therefore, as other exceptions of time or prescriptions appear to Us to be
sufficient, We are not willing for the subjects of Our Empire
to be embarrassed by difficulties of this kind, and therefore the
abovementioned exception of a year having been absolutely abolished, all other
lawful exceptions and prescriptions shall have full force in the courts,
whether they depend upon the lapse of ten, twenty, thirty, or forty years, or
whether they run for a shorter time.
(1) As nothing prevents matters which are in any way doubtful from being
explained by clearer or more comprehensive laws, We direct that all personal
actions which any voluminous interpretation has attempted to extend beyond the
limit of thirty years shall be terminated by the said period of thirty years,
unless the lawful method, which was mentioned by the ancient laws as well as
ours, introduced an interruption of the time, and that the hypothecary action
alone shall be extinguished after the expiration of forty years.
Hence, let no one venture to decide that a suit in partition, or for the
division of property owned in common, or for the establishment of boundaries,
or of partnership, or of theft, or of property seized with violence, or any
other personal action, can be brought after a longer time than thirty years.
But where a suit could properly be brought in the beginning, and, having once
been instituted, was not renewed by repeated false allegations (as was stated
in the action of theft) it may be terminated after the above-mentioned time has
expired.
All actions which have been brought in the courts, even though they are
personal ones, and have been argued, and afterwards abandoned, are hereby
excepted; for, in the case of these, Our former law provided that not thirty,
but forty years must elapse from the time when the litigants last became silent
with reference to their claims.
(2) In order that this law may not appear to be imperfect, since provision has
already been made for prescription to run against the sons of a family with
reference to their mother's estate, from the time when they were released from
paternal control, but nothing was especially provided with reference to other
property which cannot be acquired, We order, by this clearly stated law, that
no prescription can be pleaded against the sons of a family in all cases in
which property is not acquired for their parents, except from the time when
they could have brought suit, that is to say, after they had been released from
the control of their father, or of him in whose power they were; for who could
blame them for not doing this, even if they were willing, when they could not
act on account of the opposition of the law?
Given at Constantinople, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof April, during the
Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes, 530.
2. The Same Emperor to John, Prsstorian Prefect.
In order that We may protect the interests of all persons in a more thorough
manner, and that neither absence, superior authority, nor the infamy of an
adversary may injure anyone, but that a distinction may be made between the
negligent and the vigilant, We decree that if he who has possession of property
belonging to another, or
which is pledged to a creditor, should be absent, and the owner of the said
property or the creditor, desires to exercise his right of action, he shall not
be permitted to do so in the absence of his adversary, who has possession of
the property, or who labors under the disadvantage of either infancy or
insanity, and has no guardian or curator to represent him, or is subject to
superior power, and that the owner or creditor aforesaid cannot seize the
property by his own authority; but permission is hereby given him to appear
before the Governor of the province, or to send him a statement in writing, and
file his complaint within the time prescribed by law, and, by so doing,
interrupt the prescription, and this shall be amply sufficient for the purpose.
If, however, he should be unable to appear before the Governor, he can apply to
the bishop of the diocese, or the Defender of the City, and state his wishes in
writing without delay. When the Governor, the bishop, or the Defender of the
City is absent, he shall be permitted to publish his intention in the place
where the possessor has his domicile, by means of a statement signed by a
notary, or if there are no notaries in the city, by one signed by three
witnesses, and this shall be sufficient for the interruption of any
prescription, whether it be of three years, or for a longer time, or even for
thirty or forty years.
All other prescriptions of long time, whether they are of thirty or forty
years, which have been established either by ancient legislators or by
Ourselves, shall remain in full force.
Given at Constantinople, during the Kalendsof October, after the Consulate of
Lampadius and Orestes, 531.
3. The Same to John, Praetorian Prefect.
Where one person is indebted to another on account of several different claims,
and, having brought suit, did not include in his petition the separate amount
of each, but only stated the entire indebtedness, a doubt arose among the
ancient authorities whether all of the debts had been brought into court, or
whether the proceedings only related to the oldest one, or whether the act of
the creditor was void, as his intention appeared to be uncertain.
We have found disputes of this kind in many cases which have been brought in
the courts, and, above all, with reference to the interruption of prescription.
If, for instance, a personal action had been brought, and no mention of an
hypothecary action was made, certain authorities held that the personal action
was affected by the interruption of prescription, but that the hypothecary
action was extinguished on account of its not having been referred to.
And if someone had alleged in general terms that another was indebted to him,
additional doubts arose whether all competent actions should be considered to
be included in a mere statement of this kind, or whether, as they were passed
over in silence, they were barred by prescription, as they acquired no support
from the uncertain wording of the petition.
Therefore, We order that no doubt of this kind shall be entertained hereafter
in cases in court, but anyone who has instituted proceedings against his
debtor, and has produced the document evidencing his agreement, whether it only
refers to his indebtedness in a general way, or specifically mentions a single
obligation, the plaintiff shall be considered to have brought all his claims
into court, and his petition shall be held to include all personal as well as
hypothecary causes of action; and the course of prescription will be
interrupted, as prescriptions pleaded against persons who are negligent and
careless of their own rights are odious.
TITLE XLI.
CONCERNING ALLUVION, MARSHES, AND PASTURES BROUGHT INTO ANOTHER CONDITION.
1. The Emperor Gordian to Marcus.
Although it is not lawful to divert the natural course of a stream to another
place by artificial means, still it is not forbidden to protect a bank against
a rapid current. But where a river, having left its former channel, makes
another for itself, the land which it surrounds remains the property of the
former owner. If, however, it does this by degrees, and carries soil elsewhere,
this is acquired under the right of alluvion by the person to whose land it is
added.
2. The Emperors Arcadius, Honorius, and Theodosius to Csesarius, Prastorian
Prefect.
Persons whom the inundations of the River Nile enrich are required to pay taxes
in proportion to the lands which they hold. Those, however, who deplore the
loss of their estates from this cause are, on the other hand, released from the
burden of taxation. The new proprietors protected by Our generosity should
remain content with the possession of what they hold, and gratefully pay the
taxes assessed upon them.
3. The Emperors Valentinian and Theodosius to Cyrus, Prsstorian Prefect.
Land acquired by the possessors by virtue of the right of alluvion either in
Egypt on account of the inundations of the Nile, or in other provinces through
the overflow of different rivers, can neither be sold by the Treasury, claimed
by anyone, assessed separately, nor be the subject of additional taxation, and
this We decree by this law, which shall remain forever valid, lest We may
appear to ignore the defects of alluvial titles, or render the property
injurious to the possessors of the same.
In like manner, We do not permit lands which, in former times, were either
marshes or devoted to pasture, and are now rendered fertile at the expense of
the possessors of the same, to be sold, claimed, or assessed separately as
capable of cultivation and subject to in-
creased taxation, lest those who are diligent may not regret that their labors
have been dedicated to the culture of the soil, and may realize that their
industry did not result in their injury.
We decree that violators of this law shall be punished by a fine of fifty
pounds of gold, and Your Highness will also be included, if you should make any
other construction of this law, in order to countenance the claims of those who
may demand it.
TITLE XLII.
CONCERNING THE DECISIONS OF PRAETORIAN PREFECTS.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Thalassius, Prse-torian Prefect of
Illyria.
We grant the right of petition to litigants against whom a decision has been
rendered by the Praetorian Prefecture, if they allege that they have been
injured contrary to law, but We do not concede them the right of appeal, even
though the decision was said to have been rendered with reference to a curia,or
for some other object of general utility, or for any other reason, as it is not
conducive to the public welfare to deny to individuals the assistance of a law;
and hence the right of petition against decisions of the Prastorian Prefecture
is given them only within the term of two years after the judge who decided the
case has retired from office.
Given at Constantinople, on the third of the Idesof August, during the
Consulate of Theodosius, Consul for the thirteenth time, and Festus, Consul for
the fifth time, 439.
TITLE XLIII.
How AND WHEN A JUDGE SHOULD RENDER A DECISION
IN THE PRESENCE OF BOTH PARTIES, OR IN THE ABSENCE
OF ONE OF THEM.
1. The Emperor Marcus JElius Antoninus to Publicius.
You will not always be obliged to decide against an absent party under the
Rescript of My Father, by which it was provided that decisions could even be
rendered against those who are absent, for by this it is meant that you can
decide against one who is not present, but not that it is absolutely necessary
for you to do so.
2. The Emperor Gordian to Severus.
It is certain that although judgment has not been rendered under the terms of
the Peremptory Edict, a decision can be given by the judge against those who,
having been notified, have refused to appear in court.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof April, under the Consulate of Gordian and
Pontianus, 139.
3. The Same Emperor to Antistius.
You cannot avoid complying with the judgment on the ground that it was rendered
during your absence, and without your knowledge, and as you allege, no defence
was made, if, when you first learned of it, you did not immediately file a
complaint; for the decision which has been rendered will not be valid if you
did not consent to it.
Published on the fourth of the Idesof June, during the Consulate of Gordian and
Aviola, 240.
4. The Emperor Philip to Domitian.
If, as you state, the adverse party obtained a judgment against you on the
ground of contumacy, on a holiday when you were absent, or while you were
ignorant that it had been rendered by the judge, the Governor will, not without
reason, assign the case to another judge to be settled by his decision.
Published on the fifth of the Idesof October, during the Consulate of
Peregrinus and -SSlianus, 245.
5. The Same Emperor and the Csesar Philip to Longinm.
If (as you allege) the Governor of the province, after having appointed a
certain place for hearing the case, fraudulently decided it against you
elsewhere during your absence, whatever was done shall have no effect whatever
in law.
6. The Emperors Valerian and Galliemis to Domitius.
If the Governor refused to admit the appeal made by the guardian of your wards
at the time when they, having become adults, had no curator, he will be
required to hear the case again; for any decision rendered at that time should
not prejudice the rights of said minors, they having been deprived of a just
defence and the assistance of a curator.
7. The Emperor Diocletian and Maximian to Marinus.
It is certain that judgments rendered against absent parties not guilty of
contumacy, and who have not been notified in the usual way, cannot be
considered as res judicata.
Published on the third of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of
Diocletian, Consul for the fifth time, and Maximian, Consul for the fourth
time, 293.
8. The Same Emperors to Claudia.
It is in conformity with law that the Governor of the province, after having
observed all the legal formalities and notified the adverse party three times
by means of letters, or once for all by a peremptory edict to appear as is
required, if the latter perseveres in his obstinacy, to hear the allegations of
the party who is present, or take care that his successor shall do so.
Wherefore, if the other party has been summoned three times and still
obstinately refuses to appear, it
will not be unreasonable for the judge to either compel him to do so, or
transfer the possession of the property in dispute to you, and make your
adversary the plaintiff, or, having heard your defence, render his decision as
the law may require.
Published on the third of the Kalendsof October, ....
Extract from Novel 112, Chapter III. Latin Text.
He who has once brought suit, whether by instituting proceedings in court or by
the presentation of a petition to the Emperor, can notify the judge, and the
latter having served notice on his adversary, the plaintiff will be required to
prosecute the suit to the end.
If, however, he should defer doing so on the demand of the defendant, he shall
be summoned by three edicts at intervals of thirty days, for the reason that
the voice of the public crier reaches but few persons. This citation may be
issued by persons appointed by the Emperor, and applies even if the case has
not yet begun.
If, after having been summoned, the plaintiff refuses to proceed, he shall be
allowed the term of a year, and if he fails to act during that time, the judge,
having heard the allegations of the party who is present, and ascertained the
truth, shall render his decision. But where the plaintiff appears within a
year, he shall not be allowed to proceed, unless he first pays the defendant
the expenses which he has incurred. If, when these are paid, he again fails to
prosecute the case for a year, after having been summoned three times, and the
aforesaid term has expired, he shall lose all his rights of action.
9. The Same Emperors to Leontius.
It has very properly been provided that three summonses have all the force of a
peremptory edict against persons guilty of contumacy.
Published on the eleventh of the Kalendsof November, during the ^Consulate of
Diocletian, Consul for the fourth time, and Maximian, Consul for the third
time.
10. The Same Emperors to Blesius.
As you went on a journey, not of your own free will, but through necessity, the
law will not permit any judgment to be rendered against you so as to injure you
in any way, when your absence was the result of necessity.
Published on the third of the Idesof May, during the Consulate of Tiberanus and
Dio, 291.
11. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Valerius.
As you state that the suit was begun when all the parties were present, and
that afterwards judgment was rendered against you, although you were absent,
and you did not appeal within the time prescribed by law, many Imperial
Constitutions oppose your demand to have the judgment rendered against you set
aside.
TITLE XLIV.
CONCERNING OPINIONS RENDERED WITH REFERENCE TO STATEMENTS MADE IN A WRITTEN
PETITION.
1. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to Quintus.
The decision of an arbiter is void if he himself did not deliver it to the
parties litigant, even though he may have notified them in writing. Therefore,
if what you allege is true, your case can be heard again by the Governor of the
province, without taking into account the fact that you did not appeal.
2. The Emperors Valens, Valentinian, and Gratian to Probus, Prse-torian
Prefect.
We think that it should be perpetually established by this law that judges who
are required to hear and determine cases should not arrive at sudden
conclusions, but should render their decisions after careful consideration and
reflection; and, after having revised them, and reduced them to writing with
the greatest accuracy, they ought to deliver them in this form to the parties
interested, and not afterwards be permitted to correct or change them, with the
exception of the Illustrious Praetorian Prefect and others who administer
important offices, and eminent judges to whom permission is granted to read
their final decisions, or have this done by their attendants and the other
officers in their service.
Given on the eleventh of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of
Gratian, Consul for the second time, and Probus, 371.
3. The Same Emperors to Probus, Praetorian Prefect.
We order by Our general laws that all judges whom We have invested with the
power of dispensing justice in the various provinces, after having heard the
cases, shall render their final decision in writing. We add to this law that
any judgment rendered without having been reduced to writing shall not be
worthy of the name, and the formality of an appeal shall not be required for
the annulment of such a wrongful decree.
Given on the third of the Nonesof December, under the Consulate of Gratian,
Consul for the fourth time, and Equitius, 374.
Extract from Novel 117, Chapter III. Latin Text.
When the suits are of little importance, and the property involved of trifling
value, or the parties of inferior rank, the Governor must hear them and render
judgment orally, and without any costs, nor shall the bishop be required to
reduce his decision to writing in cases where persons subject to his authority
are concerned.
TITLE XLV.
CONCERNING THE FINAL AND INTERLOCUTORY DECISIONS OF ALL JUDGES.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Quintilian.
The decision of your predecessor does not appear to Us to be legal, as he, in
rendering it between the plaintiff and the defendant's attorney, did not decide
against the latter but the client represented by him, who did not appear
personally in court. You can, therefore, hear the cause again, just as if it
had never been tried.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Antoninus,
Consul for the third time, and Geta, 209.
2. The Emperor Antoninus to Sextilius.
If the arbiter appointed by the magistrate was in possession of his freedom
when he rendered his award, even though he was subsequently reduced to slavery,
the award rendered by him will, nevertheless, have the authority of res
judicata.
3. The Emperor Alexander to Vecti^ls.
The Governor of the province is aware of the fact that a final decision, which
does not include either condemnation or acquittal, is not considered legal.
Published during the Kalendsof October.
4. The Same Emperor to Severus.
It is certain that a decision rendered by a Governor contrary to the usual
formalities required in judgments does not obtain the authority of res
judicata.
Published on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of
Alexander and Dio, 230.
5. The Emperor Philip and the Csesar Philip to Montanus.
If the Attorney of the Treasury ordered the property of those indebted to it to
be delivered to their sureties, under the condition that they should indemnify
the Treasury, no appeal will lie from his decision, and it consequently must be
obeyed as rendered.
6. The Emperors Cams, Carinus, and Numerianus to Zoilus.
As you allege that the decision of the Governor is void for the reason that he
did not render it in public, but in a secret place, and without the presence of
his attendant, no injury can result to you from anything that he decided.
Published on the fifth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of Carus
and Carinus, 283.
7. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Isidora.
The Governor of the province, by persuading you to compromise with your
relatives in the action on stipulation which you brought
against them, does not extinguish the verbal obligation, which can only be
annulled in a way provided by law, for the mere act of a judge has not the
force of a judicial decision, as his authority is confined within certain
limits, as has been frequently established. Wherefore, if, having heard the
case, the Governor did not decide in accordance with the rules of law, his
words persuading you to permanently dispose of the action (if you had one)
could not produce this effect.
8. The Same Emperors and Csssars to Licinius.
If Theodora, whom you allege was liberated either on account of a purchase or
because of her delivery to a creditor in discharge of a debt, has been decided
to be free, the judgment cannot be set aside without having recourse to an
appeal. But if suit was brought, and a decision rendered after he who is said
to be the owner of the woman was notified, you will not be prevented from
recovering the amount of your interest in the purchase, if you bought her, or
to recover the debt, if she was given in payment for one.
9. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Domnus.
After final judgment in a case, anything decided by the magistrate who rendered
it, or his successor, with reference to the question already disposed of, does
not obtain the force of res judicata,nor do decisions involving possession in
any way prejudice the ownership of the property, and interlocutory decrees do
not, for the most part, terminate an action.
Ordered on the Nonesof April, during the Consulate of the Caesars.
10. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Menodorus.
Anyone invested with judicial authority is not allowed to forbid a person to
remain in his own country. Given on the third of the Nones....
11. The Same Emperors and Csssars to Lucian.
When the judge, by a final decision, merely orders that an oath shall be
tendered, without adding what shall be done if the oath is taken, or refused,
it is clear that his decision will be of no force or effect.
12. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Julian, Proconsul of Asia,.
Judges can render their decisions in the Latin as well as in the Greek
language.
13. The Emperor Justinian to Demosthenes, Praetorian Prefect.
Let no judge or arbiter think that he is compelled to abide by any of the
results of Imperial consultations which he does not consider to have been
stated properly and in accordance with law, and this
applies with still greater force to the decisions of the Illustrious Prefects
and other dignitaries, for if any matters have not been properly disposed of,
this defect should not be extended to the decrees of other judges, as the
decisions of courts should not be founded upon the examples set by others, but
upon the laws. The final decisions of the Prefecture, or the court of any other
supreme magistrate, are not binding if not legal, and We order all Our judges
to conform to the truth, and to follow the principles of law and justice. Given
on the third of the Kalendsof November ....
14. The Same Emperor to Demosthenes, Prastorian Prefect.
As that distinguished man, Papinian, very properly stated in his book of
Questions, that a judge could not only discharge the defendant from liability,
but could render a decision against the plaintiff himself, if, on the other
hand, he should find that he was indebted to the defendant, We also order this
rule to be extended so that the judge may be permitted to render a decision
against the plaintiff, and require him to either pay or do something without
allowing any exception to be pleaded against him on the ground that he is not a
competent judge of the plaintiff, for he should not object to have the same
judge whom he had accepted in the beginning of the case decide against him at
the end.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof December, during the fifth Consulate of
Lampadius and Orestes, 530.
Extract from Novel 96, Chapter II. Latin Text.
In consequence of this, if I have been sued by anyone, and desire to sue him in
return, I will not be permitted to do so except before the same judge; and, if
he is displeasing to my adversary, he can reject him within twenty days, and
have another appointed before whom the case can be tried a second time. Then
the case against me having been first disposed of, I shall be permitted to have
my own heard.
15. A Law which is not Authentic.
16. The Same Emperor to Julian, Prsetorian Prefect.
As it is customary for magistrates to render interlocutory decrees setting
forth that the parties shall not be permitted to have recourse to an appeal, or
to call their jurisdiction in question before a final decision has been given,
certain authorities held that before issue has been joined, a judge cannot be
objected to, nor can an appeal be taken from his interlocutory decree. For as
the same terms are applicable to an appeal as to an objection to jurisdiction,
and an appeal cannot be taken before issue has been joined, they thought that
no one would be permitted to refuse a judge before issue had been joined, which
is by no means prohibited. Hence judges must be careful to use terms of this
kind together, and without making any distinction between them.
TITLE XLVI.
CONCERNING DECISIONS WHICH ARE RENDERED WITHOUT STATING THE EXACT AMOUNT TO BE
PAID.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to &liana.
It is clear that the judge did not render his decision against the rule of law
in providing, as you allege, that interest must be paid until the amount
mentioned in the judgment has been settled.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Marcellinus.
Although the sum of money due is not stated in the decision of the Curator of
the State, his decision, nevertheless, is valid, since he ordered the State to
be indemnified.
3. The Emperor Gordian to JEmylius.
The following decision, namely, "Pay the entire amount due with legal
interest," does not comply with the requirements of the action to enforce
judgment, as a judicial decision which does not specify a certain sum only
obtains the authority of res judicatawhen the amount has been mentioned in some
other part of the documents belonging to the case.
4. The Same Emperor to Saturnina.
The following decision, namely, "Pay what you have received in good faith," as
it is uncertain how much the debtor received, and how much is demanded of
him --- and especially when the judge who promulgated the decision out of the
regular order has rendered an interlocutory decree that the dowry which had
been given and which was claimed had not been paid --- does not obtain the
authority of judgment.
Therefore, if another judge should afterwards render a judgment and decide
against you, and you do not appeal from his decision, you will confirm it by
your own act.
TITLE XLVII. CONCERNING DECISIONS RENDERED FOR DAMAGES.
1. The Emperor Justinian to John, Prsetorian Prefect.
As an infinite number of doubts with reference to damages arose among the
ancients, it seems best to Us, as far as is possible, to reduce this prolixity
into more narrow limits. Hence We order that, whenever the amount or the nature
of the property is certain, as in the case of sales, leases, and all other
contracts, the damages shall not exceed double the value of the property. In
other instances, however, where the value seems to be uncertain, the judges
having jurisdiction shall carefully ascertain the actual amount of the loss,
and damages to that amount shall be granted, and it shall not be reduced by any
machinations and immoderate perversions of values leading to in-
extricable confusion, lest, when the calculation is indefinitely reduced, it
may become impossible of application; as We know that it is in conformity with
Nature that those penalties alone should be exacted which can be imposed with a
proper degree of moderation, or are definitely prescribed by the laws'.
Our Constitution not only applies where loss, but also to where profit is
involved, for the reason that the ancient authorities held that damages could
be collected from him who did not obtain any profit, when he could have done
so.
Let the promulgation of this Constitution put an end to verbosity in all cases,
in accordance with what has been already stated.
Given at Constantinople on the Kalendsof September, after the fifth Consulate
of Lampadius and Orestes, 530.
TITLE XLVIII.
WHERE A DECISION HAS BEEN RENDERED BY A JUDGE WHO is SAID NOT TO BE COMPETENT.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Sabinianus.
When a judge has been appointed to decide a certain matter, and renders an
opinion with reference to others which have no connection with it, he performs
an act which is void in law.
Given on the third of the Nonesof . . . , during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and ^lianus, 224.
2. The Emperor Gordian to Licinia.
If a military judge, who was not appointed by one who had authority to do so,
should hear a case which ought to have been determined by means of a civil
proceeding, his act will not have the authority of a legal decision, and an
appeal need not be taken.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Phileta.
If a judge appointed to determine the right of ownership did not render
judgment against you on this point, the Governor of the province, after having
been applied to, shall take cognizance of your case, and decide it, and the
right of ownership will, by no means, be prejudiced because it is established
that a decision has been rendered with reference to possession.
Ordered at Herculaneum, on the Nonesof November, during the Consulate of the
Caesars, 297.
4. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Potitus, Vicegerent.
This rule also applies to the cases of private persons, namely, that a decision
rendered by a judge without authority does not bind any of the litigants.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof October ....
TITLE XLIX.
CONCERNING THE PENALTY TO WHICH A JUDGE is LIABLE WHO HAS RENDERED AN IMPROPER
DECISION, AND THE PUNISHMENT WHICH MAY BE INFLICTED UPON ANYONE WHO ATTEMPTS TO
CORRUPT A JUDGE, OR His ADVERSARY. 1. The Emperor Antoninus to Gaudius.
It is established that, where in any case, either public or private, or in
which the Treasury is interested, money is paid by anyone, whether to the judge
or to the adversary of the former, he who, doubtful of the justice of his
cause, placed a corrupt hope of success in the payment of money, will lose his
action.
Given on the seventh of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of the two
Aspers, 213.
Extract from Novel 124, Chapter II. Latin Text.
By the new law, which provides that where any person acknowledges that he has
given or promised something to another, and can prove it, he shall be pardoned,
but he who received the bribe or accepted the promise, if the case involves the
payment of money, shall be required, by the Count of Private Affairs, to pay
three times the amount of what was given, and double the amount of what was
promised, and shall be deprived of his office, and when the case is a criminal
one, all his property shall be confiscated, and he shall be sent into exile.
If, however, the litigant should be unable to prove that anything was either
given or promised, and he who is said to have accepted it swears that he did
not receive anything from him or from anyone else, or that no promise was made,
he shall be discharged. The litigant who was unable to prove his allegations
shall be compelled by the Count of Private Affairs,1 to deposit in his hands a
sum equal to the amount involved in the suit, which shall be prosecuted to a
conclusion, and in a criminal case, all his property having been confiscated, a
decision shall be rendered by a competent judge in conformity with law. If the
person indicated by the litigant should refuse to take the oath aforesaid, he
shall be subjected to the abovementioned penalty.
When, however, one of the parties litigant swears that he did not either give
or promise anything, and if it should be proved within the term of ten months
after the decision has been rendered that he did give or promise something,
both those who gave and those who received the money or other property shall
suffer the penalties aforesaid.
2. The Emperor Constantine to Felix.
He who has been corrupted by money, or who, through partiality, has rendered a
wrongful decision, shall be required to indemnify the
1 The Comes Rerum Privatarum,who took the place, and discharged the duties of
the former Imperial Procurator or Steward, was the official to whom was
committed the care and management of the private demesnes of the Emperor. --- ED.
party whom he injured, not only for the costs of the suit, but also to assume
the risk of the same.
Given at Constantinople, on the eighth of the Kalendsof November, during the
Consulate of Constantine, Consul for the fifth time, and Licinius, 319.
TITLE L.
A DECISION WHEN ONCE RENDERED CANNOT BE REVOKED.
1. The Emperor Gordian to Secundus.
There is no doubt that anyone cannot revoke either his own decision or that of
his predecessor, and it is a well-known rule of law that it is not necessary to
take an appeal from a decision of this kind.
Published during the Kalendsof March, ....
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Caesars, to Alexander.
The Perpetual Edict clearly states that peremptory exceptions which have been
omitted in the beginning can be pleaded subsequently before judgment is
rendered. If this has not previously been done, complete restitution will be
permitted; for where judgment has been rendered against persons over the age of
twenty-five years, on the ground that prescription was not contested, it cannot
be annulled without having recourse to the remedy of appeal.
Given at Nicomedia, on the seventh of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of the Caesars.
3. The Emperor Constantine to Proculus.
It has been decided that rescripts which have been granted shall not have
authority when the cases to which they relate have once been terminated by a
judicial decision which admitted of no appeal, but those who have obtained
rescripts of this kind should also be excluded from making use of them in
court.
Given at Constantinople, on the sixth of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of the Emperor ....
TITLE LI.
CONCERNING THE PROFITS AND THE EXPENSES OF LITIGATION.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Cassars, to Alexander.
The term "profits" only includes what remains after the deduction of the
legitimate expenses.
Given on the third of the Nonesof April, during the Consulate of
the Caesars.
2. The Emperor Valentinian to Olybrius, Praetorian Prefect.
The defeated party litigant is not only required to restore the property, but
also to pay over the profits which he himself has obtained, as well as those
which he could have acquired, and he must pay them from the time that he knew
that he was a possessor in bad faith, as established by the action brought in
court.
This rule shall also apply to an heir whose property is held by the same
defective title.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof March, ....
3. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Asclepiodotus, Prse-torian Prefect.
After a matter has been terminated and settled by compromise, no action, even
if based upon a rescript, will be granted for the purpose of recovering the
expenses, unless, all the parties being present, the judge who rendered an
opinion in the first matter stated in his decision that the expenses of the
case should be paid to the successful party, or that he had a right to resort
to legal proceedings to collect them, for where anyone has been released from
future liability when the case was decided, it would be infamous to authorize
another action to be brought with reference to what had been settled by the
first one.
Given at Constantinople, on the third of the Kalendsof April, during the
Consulate of Asclepiodotus and Marinianus, 423.
4. The Emperors Valentinian. Theodosius, and Arcadius, Edict to the People.
He by whose demand someone has been summoned in accordance with the legal
formalities to a place far from his residence, and the hearing of his case
protracted, is hereby notified that, if by his fault the trial was deferred, or
if he should not himself be present, or should be unable to prove his
allegations, he must pay the penalty prescribed by the laws for malicious
litigations; and if the expenses were incurred in a pecuniary case, the value
of the property claimed, as well as the time consumed in the journey, having
been considered, the judge shall render a decision in accordance with his
estimate of the damages sustained.
Given at Constantinople, on the fifth of the Idesof October, during the
Consulate of Valentinian, Consul for the seventh time, and Avie-nus, 450.
5. A Law which is not Aiithentic.
6. The Emperor Anastasius to Stephen, General of the Army.
As certain persons allege that they enjoy privileges, some of them under the
laws and Imperial constitutions, and others through special favors which have
been granted them, as well as with reference to the payment of taxes by
agreement for which they are only liable to a specified amount, and are not
required to pay the costs of litigation at all, or only a small part of the
same, We decree by this law that whoever enjoys a privilege of this kind, or
may hereafter obtain it in
any way, is hereby notified that those against whom he has instituted any civil
or criminal proceeding will also enjoy the same right; as it would be
intolerable for those who are entitled to the privileges aforesaid to be
permitted to collect, as plaintiffs, anything more from their adversaries than
they themselves, as defendants, if beaten, would be compelled to surrender to
them, in turn; so, in order that this rule may be observed in every instance
involving privileges granted through liberality, or generally attaching to
certain offices, classes, or dignities, or which have been specially bestowed
upon certain persons, or which may hereafter be conferred, whether this has
been expressly stated in the Imperial grants or Rescripts or whether it has
been omitted, We order it to be enforced.
TITLE LII. CONCERNING RES JUDICATA.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Stellator.
A judicial decision must be adhered to, but if you can prove that the party in
whose favor judgment was rendered against you has received what he appeared to
have lost by theft, you can defend yourself by an exception on the ground of
fraud, if he attempts to carry the judgment into execution.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Antoninus,
Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus.
2. The Same Emperor to Pacatianus.
If a case which has been decided could be revived under the pretext of a
mistake in calculation, litigation would never end.
Published at Rome, on the day before the Nonesof . . . , during the Consulate
of Lsetus and Cerealis, 216.
3. The Same Emperor to Demetrius and Others.
If it should appear that you have collected money by means of fraudulent
accounts, and you have been ordered to refund it with a penalty, and you did
not appeal from the decision of the Governor, you will be obliged to pay the
entire amount of the judgment.
4. The Emperor Gordian to Antoninus.
It is a bad precedent to revive a case which has been decided, under the
pretext of the discovery of new documents. Given on the eighth of the Idesof
March.
5. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Valentine.
It is clearly proved that the party demanding a delay for payment acquiesced in
the decision, and he is in the same position as one who in any other way has
agreed to it; for a case which has been terminated should not be suffered to be
revived.
6. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Julian, Proconsul of Africa.
We desire that matters which have been transacted by public authority shall
remain forever valid, as the public faith should not pass away with the death
of the official having jurisdiction.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Constans, 414.
TITLE LIII. CONCERNING THE EXECUTION OF JUDGMENT.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Justin.
The court was too hasty in ordering the pledges of Marcella to be taken in
execution and sold, for in order that the procedure prescribed by law may be
observed, you must first bring suit against your adversary, and the case having
been heard, have judgment rendered in your favor.
Published on the third of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of
Albinus and jEmilianus, 207.
2. The Same Emperors to Agrippa.
If you have not changed the judgment by novation, the Governor of the province,
after the pledges have been taken in execution and sold, shall order the
proceeds to be disposed of for your benefit. If, however, the case has been
altered by novation, an action on stipulation will lie in your favor, and a
competent judge having been appointed, you can proceed in accordance with the
legal formalities.
3. The Same Emperors to Agrippa.
The nature of the transaction and the delay in payment which has resulted
demand a more speedy remedy; therefore, if you appear before the Governor of
the province, whose duty it is to see that the judgment is executed, and state
that although the land given in pledge has, in accordance with the contract,
for a long time been offered at public sale, it has not yet found a purchaser
on account of the intrigues of the adverse party, he will place you in
possession of the said land, in order that by this means the execution which
has been so long delayed may be issued.
Given on the eleventh of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Messala
and Sabinus, 215.
4. The Same Emperors to the Soldier Marcellus.
The Governor of the province will not permit your pay to be withheld for the
purpose of satisfying the judgment which has been rendered against you, since
this can be accomplished by having recourse to other measures.
Published on the third of the Nones....
5. The Emperor Gordian to Amandus.
It is well known that the claims of a debtor can be taken in execution where
judgment has been rendered against him.
Published on the third of the Idesof October, during the Consulate of Atticus
and Prsetextus, 243.
6. The Emperor Philip and the Caesar to Titian.
If (as you allege) the court officer appointed to execute the judgment assumed
judicial duties, and thought that a decision should be rendered contrary to
what had previously been determined with reference to your case, the opinion
given by him can never obtain the torce of a judgment.
7. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Theodorus.
If the restoration to which you were entitled has been delayed by the
protracted and unconcealed efforts of the adverse party, and the slaves who
were the subject of controversy have died, their value should be paid to you by
him who prevented you from receiving them. The animals, also, together with
their offspring, shall be delivered to you by the intervention of the Governor.
8. The Same Emperors and Caesars to Nicomachus.
It is clear that the official whose duty it is to see that the judgment is
executed after it has been rendered, and the case has been heard and argued by
the parties, is the only person who can give force and effect to the decision.
Without date or designation of Consulate.
9. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Glyco.
Bring suit before the Governor of the province against those whom you allege to
be your debtors, whether they acknowledge the obligation or deny it, and having
had judgment rendered against them, if they do not satisfy it by payment within
the time prescribed by law, the Governor, observing the legal formalities
shall, after the pledges have been seized and sold, see that execution takes
place in the manner repeatedly mentioned in the Imperial constitutions.
Ordered on the Nonesof November, during the Consulate of the Csesars.
TITLE LIV.
CONCERNING INTEREST ON A JUDGMENT. 1. The Emperor Antoninus to the Managers of
Estates.He who proceeds against the property of a defeated party litigant in
accordance with the judgment rendered shall, in addition to the principal, be
entitled to interest at twelve per cent for the time which elapsed during which
he refused to obey the judgment.
2. The Emperor Justinian to Menna, Prsetorian Prefect.
Those who have been ordered to pay a certain sum of money, and have failed to
do so for more than four months from the date of the judgment, or, if an appeal
was taken, have failed to satisfy it from the day of its confirmation, We
decree shall be required to pay interest at twelve per cent; and what has been
prescribed by former laws which imposed upon them interest at twenty-four per
cent, or by Our law which fixed the rate at six per cent, shall not apply to
the cases of such persons.
Given at Constantinople, on the seventh of the Idesof April, during the
Consulate of Decius, 529.
3. The Same Emperor to John, Praetorian Prefect.We decree that if anyone should
have judgment rendered against him, and a further delay of four months has been
granted by Us, he shall, after that time has expired, be compelled to pay
interest at the rate of twelve per cent in accordance with the terms of the
judgment; but this shall only be on the principal and not on the interest which
was originally included in the judgment, for We have already decided that the
collection of interest on interest shall be abolished, and have left no case in
which this can be done. For if this was left without correction, something
absurd and awkward must necessarily result, as interest arising from contracts
is legally payable, and is very frequently fixed by Our laws at a lower rate
than twelve per cent; and compound interest would necessarily be imposed at a
higher rate than simple interest. If interest ran at twelve per cent at all
times on a judgment, this would rarely happen under the provisions of
contracts, and if, by certain articles of Our law exceptions have, in some
instances, been made, the necessities of the case were responsible for the
apparent injustice.
Hence, We, desiring to correct this by means of a proper remedy, do hereby
order that interest only on the principal to the amount of twelve per cent
shall be collected on a judgment, and that interest on interest, no matter at
what rate, shall not be exacted; since if the original contract was changed by
the judgment, interest should not be collected on the contract after the
judgment was rendered, for otherwise, it would only be payable on the principal
as a result of the judgment ; and because both principal and interest were
included in a single sum, it should not be concluded that interest on the
entire amount could be collected, but only on the principal.
(1) As the ancients, by an exceedingly pernicious regulation under which, in
the satisfaction of a judgment, indulgence was granted for two months to
persons who had lost their cases, their sureties, however, were not permitted
to enjoy this privilege, as the successful parties (the principals who had
judgment rendered against them being left for the time on account of the
provisions of the law) were authorized to collect the money or take the
property which was the object of the judgment from the sureties or mandators of
the former, We, desiring to abolish this injustice, do hereby order that the
delay
of four months which We granted to the principals in the case shall also be
extended to their sureties and mandators, in order that the law may not be
evaded, for when anyone who volunteers to defend a case is compelled to make
payment, and he, in his turn, forces the defendant involuntarily to satisfy
him, the defeated party does not experience the benefit of Our indulgence,
because, through his surety, he was compelled to pay the money which he owes.
TITLE LV.
WHERE JUDGMENT is RENDERED AGAINST SEVERAL PERSONS AT ONCE.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Victor.
If you and your colleagues have not had judgment in full rendered against you
severally, but only jointly for a single and specified sum, and it is not
stated in the judgment that what cannot be collected from one shall be made up
by the other, the effect of the decision is that each party shall be liable for
an equal portion. Therefore, if, in obedience to the judgment, you have paid
your share, you cannot be compelled to pay that of the other party if he should
fail to do so.
2. The Emperor Gordian to Annianus.
Whenever judgment is rendered against two guardians, each of whom had employed
an attorney to defend him, liability for the amount of the judgment is
considered to have been divided between them, hence it is a well-established
rule of law that what cannot be collected from one cannot be recovered from the
other.
TITLE LVI. WHO ARE NOT INJURED BY A JUDGMENT.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Masculinus.
If you did not commit the defence of your property to your brother, and did not
ratify his acts, the exception of res judicatawill not affect you, and
therefore you will not be prevented from conducting your case without prejudice
on account of the judgment.
Published during the Nonesof May, under the Consulate of Alexander, 223.
2. The Emperor Gordian to Athenius.
Where judgment has been rendered between certain parties, those who did not
appear in the case will experience neither benefit nor injury, and therefore
your granddaughter cannot be prejudiced where a judgment has been rendered
against her co-heirs, if nothing was decided against her.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Honoratus.
It is a perfectly clear rule of law that, even in criminal cases, those who did
not appear in court will not be affected, if, perchance, they should seem to
have sustained any injury.
4. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Soterianus.
It has frequently been held that where a case has been decided between certain
parties, the rights of one who is absent, and equally interested, will not be
prejudiced.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the
Caesars.
TITLE LVII.
NOTICES, LETTERS, PROCLAMATIONS, AND SIGNATURES DO NOT POSSESS THE AUTHORITY OF
JUDGMENTS.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Rogatianus.
Notification by a judge who directs certain interest to be paid by persons who
failed to discharge a debt within a specified time does not have the force of a
stipulation.
Given on the day before the Idesof January, during the Consulate of Antoninus,
Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Maximus.
The fact that the Governor of the province, by a letter, ordered you to pay a
certain sum of money to the State, does not have the effect of a judicial
decision.
Given on the fourth of the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Julianus, 234.
3. The Same Emperor to Zoticus.
It has frequently been stated in Rescripts that a decision rendered after the
trial of a case cannot be revoked by the signature of the Emperor.
Published on the sixth of the Idesof September, during the Consulate of Albinus
and Maximus, 228.
4. The Emperor Gordian to Asclepiodotus.
The interlocutory decree of a Governor, which has been duly recorded, ordering
the party sued to obey it by making payment of a debt or be liable to double or
quadruple damages, is rather the act of one who gives warning than the decision
of a magistrate, as the rule of law declares that an act of this kind does not
obtain the force of a judgment.
5. The Same Emperor to Jucundus.
The judge who admitted the controversy should have heard and examined the
allegations of both parties, for there is no doubt that the
note which he appended to the petition, and by which he placed one of the
parties in possession of the land, cannot be considered to take the place of a
judgment.
6. The Emperor Philip and the Csesar Philip to Cassianus.
It is clear that a proclamation published by the Governor of a province cannot
have the force of a judgment any more than a summons.
7. The Emperor Constantine to Bassus, Prsetorian Prefect.
It is not proper or customary for a judgment rendered after a prolonged contest
to be stated in a few written phrases.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of
Constantine, Consul for the sixth time, and Maximus, 306.
TITLE LVIII.
WHERE A JUDGMENT is BASED ON FORGED DOCUMENTS OR FALSE EVIDENCE.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Bassianus.
If you desire to declare a will to be forged, in accordance with the terms of
which the illustrious Proconsul has rendered a judgment, he will grant you a
hearing, notwithstanding this is barred by the judgment, because the question
as to the forgery of the will has not yet been decided.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Optatus.
Those who did not appeal when they were able to prove that they had lost their
case by reason of forged documents should be heard just as if the suit was
begun for the first time, as they are giving information with reference to a
crime.
Published on the sixth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of
Julian, Consul for the second time, and Crispinus.
3. The Same Emperor to Clement.
You will not be prevented from proving in the ordinary way that the evidence
which the adverse party produced against you in court is (as you allege) false.
The judgment, however, shall not be set aside unless you can show that he who
rendered it decided against you, because he relied upon the genuineness of an
instrument which is proved to have been forged.
Published on the seventh of the Kalendsof September, ....
4. The Emperor Gordian to Herennius.
The execution of a judgment is usually suspended, and recovery of what has been
paid granted, if it can be shown by positive evidence that the judge was
deceived by aforged instrument, the commission of the crime having afterwards
been established.
Published on the fifth of the Idesof September, ....
TITLE LIX. CONCERNING CONFESSIONS.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Julianus.
It has been decided that confessions made in court have the effect of
judgments, therefore you have no right to revoke your confession, as you will
be compelled to make payment.
Adopted on the third of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Gentian
and Bassus, 212.
TITLE LX.
ACTS PERFORMED OR JUDGMENTS RENDERED BETWEEN SOME PERSONS CANNOT PREJUDICE THE
RIGHTS OF
OTHERS.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Epicratus.
It has frequently been decided that matters transacted by certain persons
cannot prejudice the rights of others. Wherefore, although you state that some
of the heirs of him whom you allege to have been your debtor have paid you, the
others should not be pressed for settlement unless the indebtedness is proved
to be due.
Given at Byzantium, on the fifth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate
of the above-mentioned Emperors.
2. The Same Emperors and Cassars to Epicrates.
It is a well-known rule of law that a compromise made between certain parties
cannot prejudice the rights of another who is absent. Therefore, having
appeared before the Governor of the province, prove that your grandmother gave
you the slave in question, and if the Governor should find that he legally
belongs to you for this reason, he will cause him to be restored to you, for if
the others divided the slave during your absence, they could not deprive you of
any of your rights.
3. The Same Emperors and Cassars to Fortunata.
If you, along with your brother, succeeded to your mother, and your brother
entered into a compromise with the creditors of the estate with reference to
your share of the same, and did so without your consent, he could not
extinguish the right acquired by you to your share of said estate.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof October, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.
TITLE LXI. CONCERNING REFERENCES TO THE EMPEROR.
1. The Emperor Constantine to Profuturus, Prefect of Subsistence.
When a judge thinks that the case should be referred to Us, and
does not decide between the parties, but concludes that the point upon
which he is in doubt ought to be left to Our wisdom, or if he has rendered a
judgment, he must not prevent the litigants from afterwards appealing from it,
for fear that it may be reversed, being well aware that if he does so, an
appeal can, nevertheless, legally be taken. Nothing should be sent to Us which
needs a complete examination. Whenever the judge believes that a case should be
referred to Us, he must immediately order all the litigants to be notified that
a consultation is about to take place, and if the point referred is not
sufficiently explicit, or appears to be contrary to law, the judge shall,
without any unnecessary delay, be required to place the petition upon
record.
Given at Sirmium, on the fourth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate
of Constantine, Consul for the fifth time, and Lici-nius, 312.
Extract from Novel 125, Chapter I. Latin Text.
Under the provisions of the new law, where a case has been thoroughly examined
it should be terminated by the decision, which should be formally executed,
unless an appeal is taken.
2. The Emperors Valentinian and Valens to Viventius, Prsetorian Prefect.
The Governors of provinces must not think that criminal cases originating in
their jurisdiction should be referred to Us unless they have previously
notified the parties that this is to be done, for only the truth will be
established when the matters are referred, whether their allegations are
refuted or confirmed by their consent.
Given on the twenty-third of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulship of
Valentinian and Valens, 365.
3. The Same Emperors and Gratian to Apodemius.
If when either reason or necessity requires Our decision in any instance, and
an opinion is expected, the submission of the reference must include the whole
case, so that, having been read, it will not be necessary for all the documents
to be reviewed; still, all of them should accompany the application.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof May, during the Consulate of Our Noble Prince
Valentinian, and Victor, 369.
TITLE LXII. CONCERNING APPEALS AND IMPERIAL DECISIONS.
1. The Decree of the Divine Severus, Published with Reference to Marcus
Priscus, on the Ides of January, during the Consulate of Pom-peianus and
Avitus, 210.
The Governor of the province must first determine the question of possession,
and then inquire into the crime of violence, and if he should not do so, there
will be good ground to appeal from his decision.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Plautianus.
What you demand is not new, hence you must not be denied the right to appeal,
even though one of My Rescripts is pleaded against you.
3. The Emperor Gordian to Victor.
It has frequently been established that, where an appeal was taken, although it
may have been rejected by the court, nothing took place to prejudice the
decision, and that everything remains in the same condition that it was when
judgment was rendered.
Published on the fourth ....
4. The Emperor Philip and the Csesar Philip to Probus.
If, having been appointed to the office of clerk, you did not appeal, the laws
cannot be violated by your refusal.
5. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Valens and Others.
If the Governor of the province, to whom you have appealed, should decide that
you were not to blame because you did not file your petition within the time
prescribed by law, but that this resulted from the death of the person who had
been charged with presenting it, he will grant you relief in accordance with
the terms of the Perpetual Edict.
6. The Same Emperors and Csesars decree:
It is proper for those who have jurisdiction of appeals, and hear them, to
dispose of them in such a way that it may be understood that the appeal was
filed after a decision was rendered by the court below, as it is not right
that, under any pretext whatever, the case should be sent back to the trial
judge, but in every instance it must be ended by its own decision; as the
salutary law enacted with reference to this provides that, after the appellate
judge has passed upon the appeal, recourse cannot be had to the magistrate from
whose decision the appeal was taken. Wherefore, judges are hereby notified
that, under no pretext whatever, can litigants be sent back to their own
provinces, as appellate judges in every instance are only permitted to
determine whether the appeal was properly taken or not.
(1) If one of the litigants should think that he has failed to make use of some
good defence in his allegations before the lower court, he can avail himself of
it before the judge who has cognizance of the appeal, as it is Our desire that
judges should only decide in conformity with justice, and that no important
evidence which may have been omitted should be excluded.
(2) When anyone, after having taken an appeal, thinks that the presence of
certain persons is necessary for him to establish the truth before the judge
who has jurisdiction of the appeal, because he believes that it was concealed,
and the judge decides that this ought to be done, the appellant should pay the
said witnesses their travelling
expenses, for justice demands that he who thinks that he is interested in
having them summoned should do this.
(3) However, with reference to those who, accused of capital offences, have
appealed from the sentences passed upon them, neither they themselves nor those
who appeal in their behalf, can do so until the case has been fully heard and
argued and judgment has been rendered, and We order that this rule shall be
observed, in order that if the defendant is unable to obtain a solvent surety
he may be kept in custody, and that the judges shall send their decisions as
well as copies of the documents filed by the appellants, together with the
replies made to them, to the court of appeal, so that the condition of the case
may be made clear to the appellate judge, and its merits having been
considered, judgment be rendered in accordance with the rights of each of the
parties.
(4) In order that the power to appeal may not be rashly and indiscriminately
granted, We decree that he who has failed to establish his case on appeal shall
be compelled by a competent judge to pay a reasonable penalty.
(5) Where, however, anyone having conducted his own case in court, and having
been defeated, desires to appeal, he must file his petition on the same day, or
on the next after judgment has been rendered. He who is transacting the
business of another must, under the same circumstances, appeal within three
days.
Extract from Novel 23, Chapter I. Latin Text.At present, the term of ten days
from the date of the judgment is granted in which to file an appeal.
END OP THE EXTRACT.
THE TEXT OP THE CODE FOLLOWS .
(6) The judge shall, without delay, notify the other party that an appeal has
been taken, even when the appellant does not request it, but the former is by
no means required to furnish security to conduct his side of the appeal.
Without date or designation of Consulate.
7. The Same Emperors and Caesars to Nero.
If those who have been appointed to civil offices, to the decurionate, or to
any other honors, even though they may have been released from the discharge of
their duties by the Emperor, do not avail themselves of the aid of an appeal,
they will be considered to have confirmed their appointments by their own
consent. Therefore, as you have been appointed to a public office, and have
appealed, prove before the Governor of the province that you have done so for a
good reason.
8. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Opimiamiis.Where a decision has been
rendered against someone who is more than twenty-five years of age, and an
appeal was not taken within
the time prescribed by law, and the Governor of the province ascertains that
the matter was not settled by compromise while the appeal was pending, he shall
see that the judgment is executed.
9. The Same Emperors and Caesars to Our Dear Haberad.
The principal party in the case can himself prosecute an appeal which his
attorney has taken in the course of the proceedings, even during the absence of
the latter.
10. The Same Emperors and Csssars to Titian.
If an attorney appointed by a curator should lose the case, he himself as well
as the curator can invoke the aid of appeal, or the curator alone can exercise
that right. If, however, the minor should, in the meantime, claim the
indulgence due to his age, or attain his majority, he can, in his own name,
conduct the appeal.
Ordered on the day before the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of the
Caesars.
11. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Antoninus.
Citizens, and the inhabitants of towns who have good excuses and did not appeal
after having legally been appointed to office, will not be permitted to
establish the trust of their allegations.
12. The Emperor Constantine to Catulinus.
Where an appeal has been filed in a civil case it is, under no circumstances,
allowed for the appellant to be kept in prison, or subjected to any kind of
injury whatsoever, or be tortured or even exposed to insult. It is, however,
otherwise in criminal prosecutions, for in these, even if an appeal can be
taken, the defendant must be kept in custody until the case has been decided
after the appeal, if he is not able to furnish a surety who is solvent.
Adopted on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of
Volusianus and Annianus, 314.
13. The Same Emperor to Petronius Probianus, Greeting.
From the time when proceedings in civil cases were instituted between private
individuals, and you determined to consult or refer them to Us, or you admitted
the appeal, and complied with the requisite legal formalities, nothing
afterwards should be permitted or performed by you in any way, even if any
evidence of Our favor should be produced, but you must, in obedience to former
laws, do all that is required and see that the case is sent to the Imperial
Court.
Published during the Idesof October, during the Consulate of Sabinus and
Rufinus, 316.
14. The Same Emperor to Bassus, Prefect of the City.
Litigants have a right to immediately appeal orally, without doing so in
writing, if the circumstances of the judgment demand it, and this applies to
civil as well as to criminal cases.
Given at Sirmium, on the eighth of the Idesof June, during the Consulate of
Gallicanus and Bassus, 317.
15. The Same Emperor to Severus Vicegerent.
In order that it may not be necessary for cases which have been brought before
Us on appeal to be sent back to the lower court, We order that all necessary
information be inserted in the papers. We are compelled to be lenient in
rendering Our Decrees, as there is reason to apprehend that where a case has
not been thoroughly investigated the opportunity for further examination may be
lost. Therefore, a judge shall be liable to perpetual infamy if all the matters
stated by the litigants in the examination and the evidence are not inserted,
and cannot be found in the documents accompanying the
appeal.
Given at Aquileia, on the tenth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of
Constantine, Consul for the fifth time, and Licinius, 319.
16. The Same Emperor to Maximus.
Those also are entitled to the benefit of an appeal against whom judgment has
been rendered by a deputy appointed by the Emperor.
Given at Sirmium, on the day before the Idesof January, during the Second
Consulate of Crispus and Constantine, 321.
17. The Same Emperor to Julian, Prefect of the City.
When, after a case has been heard by any of the Praetors, an appeal is taken by
either party, the appellant must obey the judgment of the Prefect of the City.
Given at Heraclea on the third of the Nonesof August, during the Consulate of
Constantine, Consul for the seventh time, and the Caesar Constantius, Consul
for the third time, 326.
18. The Same Emperor to Victor, Collector of Taxes of the City of Rome.
As some debtors of the Treasury, when ordered to pay certain sums of money, are
accustomed to evade execution by having recourse to an appeal, which they do
not afterwards attempt to prosecute, it has been decided that if they do not
comply with all the formalities prescribed by law within the proper time, the
appeal shall be held to have been abandoned, and the amount due shall
immediately be collected.
Given on the day before the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of
Constantius and Maximus, 327.
19. The Same Emperor to All the Inhabitants of the Provinces.
We permit appeals to be taken from the decisions of Proconsuls, counts, and
those who preside in the place of prefects, whether the decisions have been
made on appeal, after delegation, or under ordinary jurisdiction, but the judge
must give a copy of the decision to the appellant, as well as send to Us all
the pleadings of the parties, together with the arguments on both sides, as
well as his own decision.
We do not permit an appeal to be taken from the decisions of Praetorian
Prefects. If the defeated party can show that he applied for an appeal, but
that the judge refused to entertain it, he can go before the Prefect and begin
the case again just as if an appeal had been taken. If the appellant is shown
not to have appealed on proper grounds, and loses his case, he shall be.
branded with infamy. If, however, he should succeed, the judge who refused to
receive his appeal must be prosecuted before Us, in order that he may be
properly punished.
Given at Constantinople on the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Bassus and Ablavius, 331.
20. The Same Emperor to Albinus.
The power of appeal is granted in cases of great as well as minor importance,
and the judge should not think that he has sustained any injury because the
litigant has had recourse to an appeal.
Given on the seventh of the Idesof April, during the Consulate of Marcellinus
and Probinus.
21. The Emperors Constantius and Constans to Lollianus, Prse-torian Prefect.
As ordinary judges frequently hold that appeals should be rejected, it is
hereby decreed that if any judge should refuse to permit an appeal to be taken,
which is not against the execution of the judgment but against the judgment
itself, which has been finally rendered, he shall be compelled to pay thirty
pounds of gold to the Treasury of Our Largesses, and his officer shall also be
required to pay the same amount, unless he can show that he obstinately
resisted, and opposed, in writing, the decision rendered by the judge.
Given on the eighth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Arbitio
and Lollianus, 355.
22. The Same Emperor to Volusianus, Prsetorian Prefect.
Where a judgment has been rendered with reference to property which has no
owner, or that of which persons have been deprived by law as being unworthy to
hold it, and anyone thinks that an appeal should be taken, his right to do so
shall be admitted.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Arbitio and
Lollianus, 355.
23. The Same Emperor to the Senate.
When an appeal is taken from judgments rendered in Bithynia, Paphlagonia,
Lydia, the Islands of the Hellespont, Phrygia, Europe, Rodope, and Mount Hemus,
the appellant must comply with the decision of the Prefect of this City.
24. The Emperor Valentinian and Valens to the Council of the City of Carthage,
Greeting.
The necessity is imposed upon judges not only to permit an appeal to be taken,
but also to remember that the term of only thirty days is
granted from the date of the judgment within which the parties litigant are to
be notified that an appeal has been granted. The judge and his officer shall be
liable to a fine if they fail to observe these rules in
every particular.
Given at Milan, on the day before the Nonesof February, during the Consulate of
the Divine Jovian and Varonianus, 364.
25. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Sya-grius, Prsetorian
Prefect.
We order that appeals from judgments imposing fines shall be
permitted.
Given on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Gratian,
Consul for the fifth time, and Theodosius, 380.
26. The Same Emperors to Pelagius, Count of Private Affairs.
Let an appeal to Your Excellency be taken from the decision of the Imperial
Procurator, so that if the trifling value of the property involved, or the
distance, does not permit the litigants to appear in your court, refer the
matter to the Governor of the province for his decision, if you should approve
of this being done.
Given at Milan, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate
of Arcadius and Bauto, 385.
27. The Emperors Theodosius, Arcadius, and Honorius to Evodius, Proconsul of
Africa.
Appointments made by notices or edicts without public authority are not valid,
and if the proper formalities have not been complied with, it is not necessary
to appeal from them.
Given at Milan, on the seventeenth of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of Olybrius and Probinus, 395.
28. The Same Emperors to Neridius, Proconsul ofAsia-Anyone who has taken an
appeal is hereby notified that he has a right to change his mind, and withdraw
his petition, in order that the opportunity for just repentance may not be
lost.
Given at Constantinople, on the eleventh of the Kalendsof August, during the
Consulate of Arcadius, Consul for the fourth time, and Honorius, Consul for the
third time, 396.
29. The Same Emperors to Eutychianus, Prsetorian Prefect.It shall not be lawful
for persons sentenced to punishment, after having been condemned for the
enormity of their crimes, to be arbitrarily removed and held by force, and from
humane considerations, We do not refuse to persons of this kind the power to
appeal in criminal cases, provided this is done within the time prescribed by
law; so that a more careful examination may take place, where injustice is
thought to have been committed, and the safety of a man endangered through the
error or prejudice of the court.
However, if a Proconsul, the Count of the East, the Augustal Prefect, or any of
the Imperial Deputies were among the judges, it is
hereby decreed that an appeal cannot be taken to Us, but they shall have the
most ample power to execute sentence; for We desire them to have full authority
to punish those who are condemned in the manner prescribed by law, if
circumstances and the crime demand it.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Honorius,
Consul for the fourth time, and Eutychianus, 393.
30. The Same Emperors to Theodore, Prsstorian Prefect.
When anyone appeals for the reason that he wishes to avoid the judgment
rendered against him by a judge whom he regards as suspicious, he shall have
full power to do so; nor need he be apprehensive of the undue severity of
judges, as he can easily appeal from any injurious decision which they may
render, and especially as the Praetorian Prefect is the only one from whom he
is not permitted to appeal without losing his case. Therefore, all persons are
informed that the right of appeal is granted to them from the unjust decisions
of judges, and from the rulings of those who are suspected, in capital cases,
as well in those involving the loss of their fortunes.
Given at Milan, on the seventh of the Idesof June, during the Consulate of
Theodore, Consul for the fifth time, 399.
31. The Emperors Theodosius and Honorius to Asclepiodotus, Prse-torian Prefect.
If the judge of the lower court refuses to permit an appeal to be taken against
his decision, to the tribunal of Your Highness, or to the Prefecture of the
City, or if the appeal having been admitted, he should refuse to notify the
parties, the appellant shall, according to the ancient law, be entitled to the
term of a year from the date of the decision to file a complaint on account of
this injustice, as well as to prosecute the judge; or where an appeal of this
kind was not allowed after having been requested of the judge of the lower
court, the appellant will be entitled to six months for the purpose of doing
these things.
If, however, the judge should refuse to grant the appeal, or to refer the case
to the proper magistrate, four months shall be granted, so that those acts
which We have prescribed having been performed, the appellant may proceed
during the time known to have been fixed by law for the prosecution of appeals.
Given at Constantinople, on the third of the Kalendsof April, during the
Consulate of Asclepiodotus and Marinianus, 423.
32. The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian to Cyrus, Prsetorian Prefect.
We order that hereafter there shall be no recourse to Us by appeal from the
decisions of judges of distinguished rank, lest the rights of others may seem
to be infringed if We are called upon to consider them, and are called away
from the occupations which We are pursuing for the general welfare. If,
however, a case should be appealed from the decision of any of the Proconsuls,
or the Augustal Prefect, or from
that of the Count of the East, or of any of the Vicegerents of the Emperor, We
order that the illustrious Praetorian Prefect, who is a member of Our retinue,
as well as the illustrious Quaestor of Our Palace, shall take cognizance of the
appeal in the same order, and with the observation of the same formalities, and
at the same times as other actions taken up in one appeal are decided in the
Imperial Council; and this shall be done, even though some of the eminent
magistrates aforesaid have the right, as judges, to hear appeals.
(1) When an appeal is taken from a decision of a duke who is at the same time a
Governor, the Prefect shall be required to hear and determine the same, in
accordance with the ordinary rules of his tribunal.
(2) In all the different judicial proceedings which We have introduced instead
of references to Us, or the notices or other matters connected with the same,
where an appeal is taken from the decision of a judge, the above-mentioned
distinguished magistrates must hear the appellants and take cognizance of their
demands, and We order Our secretaries to obtain the papers and record them, and
notify the parties litigant, and the officials associated with the illustrious
Quaestor shall execute the judgments.
(3) These rules shall apply where an appeal was taken from the decision of a
judge who did not hear the case by virtue of a special appointment, for when
the time of the execution of a judgment is extended by an appeal from the
decision of a judge who was specially designated for that purpose, it will be
necessary for the magistrate who appointed him to ascertain whether or not
there is good ground for an appeal.
(4) We think that it is eminently proper to add to this most salutary law that
if the Emperor, after having been applied to, should assign the case to a
private individual, or to one or more persons who are not of illustrious rank,
to be heard (as is customary), and an appeal should be taken from the decision
of the person thus appointed, the illustrious Praetorian Prefect, who is one of
Our retinue, shall hear and decide the case along with the illustrious
Qusestor, at the proper time.
Our secretaries shall receive and record all matters heard and decided by Our
arbiters, and notify the litigants in writing, and they shall also receive and
examine any appeals taken from the awards of arbiters especially appointed by
Us (even though they be of illustrious rank) provided the cases are referred to
the Council of the Empire.
(5) But when an appeal is taken from the decision of the illustrious and
distinguished judges who do not belong to the court of last resort, We order
that it shall be heard by Us, even though it may have been taken from the
decision of someone who was appointed by Us to decide it, and who was not
originally of illustrious rank, but was afterwards raised to the dignity of a
noble.
The same rule shall also be observed when another arbiter also not of noble
birth is associated with him.
(6) Moreover, anything which has not been expressly stated in this law shall be
understood to remain subject to the rules of the ancient laws and
constitutions.
33. The Same Emperors to Cyrus, Prsetorian Prefect.
In a case in which the attendant of an officer of the rank of general, with
reference to whose status a controversy arises in a province on the ground that
he is a decurion, or is a member of the retinue of the Governor, and is
detained in the province for the reason that he has not paid his taxes, or
discharged his official duties, and the decision of the Governor of the
province is not executed, for the reason that an appeal has been taken from the
same, We order that the case shall be decided by Your Highness, along with the
distinguished general, according to its merits, even though the general may
have appointed the Governor of the province to hear it.
34. The Emperor Justinian to Demosthenes, Prsetorian Prefect.
We decree that when any judge of superior or inferior rank suggests that a
matter which We appointed him to decide, or which he should determine as
belonging to his jurisdiction, should be referred to Us, the case which has
been appealed shall be decided by Us in Council, whether his opinion
accompanied the reference or not (provided he did not state it to the parties)
; or if nothing of this kind was added, but he simply requested a reply from
Our Majesty, the case should not be determined until Our order, two illustrious
men who are either of patrician, consular, or prefectorian rank, and whom We
have selected for that purpose, are ordered to be joined with the illustrious
Quaestor of Our Palace, and with him examine the appeal (whether they do so in
the presence or the absence of the parties to the suit), and give their opinion
concerning the case; and the decision made by these most eminent magistrates
shall be considered as final; and permission shall not be given to appeal from
it, or to raise any doubt whatever concerning the same.
We decree that this rule shall not only apply where a single judge has referred
a case of this kind to Us, but where two or more judges were appointed and none
of them agreed, but each one submitted a different opinion for Our
consideration; or where they all consulted Us as to what disposition should be
made of the case.
35 and36. Laws which are not Authentic.
37. The Emperor Justinian to Menna, Prsstorian Prefect.
We think that the following should be added where appeals are taken by which it
is customary to bring matters for final determination to the Imperial Palace,
namely, when the amount in dispute does not exceed ten pounds of gold, one
judge alone, and not two (as was formerly the practice) shall be appointed to
decide it. If, however, the value of the property exceeds that amount but is
not more than twenty pounds of gold, the matter shall be submitted to two
illustrious judges, who will take cognizance of the question involved, which
must
be reduced to writing by the clerks, so that if they differ, they may call in
the illustrious Quaestor, and the doubt be disposed of by his
decision.
In actions, however, where the property involved exceeds in value the sum of
twenty pounds of gold, they should be brought before the distinguished nobles
who compose the Council of State of Our Sacred Palace, so that, in accordance
with what has already been established, not only the defeated party but also
the one who is successful may have the case referred to one or two judges, but
this must be done within the term of two years, as, after that time has
elapsed, We refuse to authorize it. Any decisions made by one or more of these
judges shall, under no circumstances, be subject to appeal. We, however, permit
new allegations to be made by the litigants before the said judge or judges,
just as in the case of a reference to the Council of Our Sacred Palace.
Given at Constantinople, on the eighth of the Idesof April, during
the Consulate of Decius, 329.
38. The Same Emperor to Demosthenes, Prsetorian Prefect.
Where an appeal was taken from the decision of a duke, whether under his
regular jurisdiction, or whether he was especially appointed to hear the case
by the Emperor, or whether he himself was included among the eminent
magistrates, or was of illustrious rank, or even if he was of higher position
(as military men as well as those of consular rank often discharge duties of
this kind when required to do so by the public welfare), no distinction being
made on this account, but only the ducal dignity being considered, the appeal
having been taken from the decision of any duke whomsoever, shall not, as was
formerly the case, be disposed of by the judges, but We order that it shall be
referred to and decided by the most sublime Master of the Offices, and the most
excellent Qusestor of Our Palace, who shall hear it together, as is done in Our
Council of State, and that it shall be recorded by Our Imperial Secretaries,
and that none of the provisions of the ancient law with reference to such cases
shall be observed, but it shall only be brought before the said most eminent
magistrates.
39. The Same Emperor to Julian, Prsetorian Prefect.
We, having greater consideration for Our subjects than they themselves would
perhaps display, do hereby amend an ancient rule, that is to say, in cases of
appeal, he alone who had recourse to such a proceeding is entitled to have the
decision of the judge corrected, but the other party who failed to do this is
compelled to obey the decision, no matter what it may be.
Hence We order that if the appellant should come into court, and state the
grounds for appeal, and his adversary wishes to contest the judgment, and is
prepared, he can do so, if his position is worthy of the attention of the
court. But when he is absent the judge must, nevertheless, use his authority to
protect his rights.
(1) Moreover, with reference to the legal documents required for the appeal,
which, by all means, must be read before the distinguished
and learned men composing the Imperial Council, the parties litigant, as well
as those who draw up said documents, must be careful not to use too many words,
and not to repeat statements which have already been made therein, but they
must only insert those things which set forth the causes for the appeal,
expressed in concise language, and must see that they do not contain any new
matter, or make additions to supply what was omitted, for they are hereby
notified that if this is not done, those who drew up the papers will be liable
to the just indignation of the judges of the court of appeal, for a succinct
statement of the facts and an abridgment of the opinions of the eminent
magistrates who originally heard the case will be amply sufficient.
(2) We remember that, by a law which We recently promulgated, We order that one
judge should be appointed to hear cases in which a sum up to the value of ten
pounds of gold is involved, and that two should be appointed when the value was
twenty pounds of gold, in accordance with the custom observed in cases brought
before the Imperial Council.
But as, at first sight, the amount might not appear to be so large, and in the
final decision the judge or judges concluded that a greater one should be
considered, and since it was not possible for them to exceed the limits by
which they were bound, We grant them full power in cases of this kind to adopt
a larger sum than that above mentioned, if the value of the property was more
than originally estimated by them, and they shall be permitted to render their
decision in conformity to the truth, and not in accordance with the first
appraisement, in order that magistrates may not be impeded in the discharge of
their duties, but may strictly enforce observance of the laws, and in every
respect exert their judicial authority.
Given at Constantinople, on the sixth of the Kalendsof April, during the fifth
Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes, 530.
TITLE LXIII.
CONCERNING DELAYS, AND THE AMENDMENTS OF APPEALS OR REFERENCES TO THE EMPEROR.
1. The Emperor Constantine to Crispinus.
If anyone, having been appointed duumvir, or honored with any other office, or
invested with any public charge during his absence, should invoke the aid of
appeal, he will only be entitled to the term of two months in which to file his
application, to be computed from the time when he can show that he was first
notified of his appointment; but if he was present, the said term of two months
must be computed from the very day when his appointment was made.
Given on the eighth of the Idesof July, during the Consulate of Constantine,
Consul for the sixth time, and the Caesar Constantius, 820.
2. The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian to Cyrus, Praetorian Prefect.
We think that it will be to the advantage of Our reign for the provisions of
the laws having reference to time granted to litigants to be amended, and that
pretexts for delay should, under all circumstances, be abolished. We order
that, after an appeal has been granted, the time allowed for the prosecution of
the same, whether this has been done by the illustrious Governor of the
province, or by an eminent judge, shall, in the first place, be six months. If
the appellant permits this time to go by, We grant him an additional term of
thirty-one days. If he should let this pass, We allow him, in like manner, a
third term of the same number of days. If the third term should also expire, We
decree that he shall be entitled to a fourth and final term of thirty-one days.
If the appellant should also let this fourth term elapse, We decree that he
shall be granted the term of three months longer, to petition Us to have his
right to appeal restored. This application having been made, We decree that it
will not be necessary to notify his adversary or to mention the time which has
expired, in his petition, but We direct that the term of three months shall be
computed from the date of the expiration of the fourth and last term, even
though restoration of his right of appeal was granted one day before, or the
judgment was not rendered by one of the illustrious Prefects.
These rules shall not prejudice the adverse party, as the expiration of the
time is not uncertain, but is well known to all persons, and they apply to
appeals from the decisions of the illustrious Governors of provinces, as well
as from those of eminent judges. Where an appeal is taken from the decision of
an arbiter in a province, who has been specially appointed by the Emperor, We
authorize three similar terms, after the first one has expired (as above
stated) to which the appellant shall be entitled, but he shall have no
restoration of his right to appeal granted by Us, so that, after the ninety-
three days shall have elapsed, the execution of the judgment must be ordered.
If, however, the arbiter was specially appointed in this Most Holy City, by the
Praetorian Prefect,, the Master of the Offices, or any other official of
exalted rank, and the appeal should be taken against either the ruling or
decision rendered by the lower court, the first term within which it can be
brought shall consist of two months, but the other three shall be computed as
above set forth. Anyone who takes an appeal from the decision of an arbiter,
who has been specially appointed by the Governor of a province, or an eminent
judge, shall be entitled to two months in which to file it, and also for three
other terms as above enumerated.
With reference to the observance of the terms aforesaid, We order that if they
should happen to occur during holidays, those which precede them may be counted
by the litigants as available.
If anyone, without observing the provisions of the law, should permit the time
to elapse, he can be opposed in the first instance by his adversary, or by the
judge if the appellant alone is present in
court, and the latter shall be considered as having accepted the decision
without having been subjected to any restraint.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Valentinian,
Consul for the fifth time, and Anatolius, 440.
Extract from Novel 29, at the Beginning. Latin Text.
A year is granted to the party who takes an appeal, within which time he must
prosecute it, either alone or in company with his adversary ; or, where there
is good reason for doing so, he may be granted still another year, and if the
case has not been disposed of at the expiration of that time, the decision will
stand confirmed.
If the appellant has failed to proceed when only one month remains of the term
of two years, the successful party will have the right to have him summoned,
and whether he is found or not, the former can make his allegations, and the
decision shall be either affirmed or set aside; and, in every instance,
judgment for the costs, dependent upon the number of terms which have been
granted, shall be rendered against the absent party. If, after the lapse of the
term of two years, neither of the parties should appear, the decision shall be
affirmed.
Extract from Novel 93, Chapter I. Latin Text.
Where, however, arbiters are chosen by the parties after an appeal has been
taken and brought before the appellate court, whether it has been heard or not,
and, in the meantime, the term of two years within which the appeal must be
disposed of in accordance with law has expired, and, for this reason, the case
again comes under the jurisdiction of the appellate judge, the parties will not
be prejudiced by the lapse of time; but the case can proceed and reach a
legitimate termination, even if ten thousand more terms of two years have
elapsed, unless the said term of two years shall have expired after the
judgment was rendered without an appeal having been taken.
Extract from Novel 23, Chapter II. Latin Text.
Where a case is intended to be referred to the Imperial Council, it will not be
prejudiced by delay until the Emperor himself has brought it to the attention
of the Council, and it has been finally disposed of in the ordinary way by the
illustrious dignitaries composing the same.
Extract from Novel 119, Chapter IV. Latin Text.
When an appeal has been taken, and one or both of the parties have been granted
more time, or only one of them has availed himself of the right to appeal, and
has appeared before the judge who is to examine the appeal, or before his
advisors, or those who present cases to the court, and the judge appoints a
certain time for the case to be heard, We do not wish the rights of either or
both of the parties to be prejudiced on this account, but that, after this,
appeals of this kind shall be examined and terminated by decisions in
accordance with law.
3. The Emperor Justini-an to Appio, Praetorian Prefect.Let no one think that,
in the future, he will be permitted to appeal to the members of the Imperial
Council after the legally established
terms have expired, either by means of a petition, or through a Rescript of the
Emperor granting him restitution of his right, nor in any other way whatsoever;
but all persons shall be required to use due diligence for the purpose of
taking advantage of appeals within the time fixed by law, and a statement of
what has taken place in the lower court and has been made the basis of appeal
shall not be filed in the office of the Imperial Secretary near the expiration
of the term, lest, by evil schemes, the termination of the case may be
interfered with, but this shall be done immediately after the appeal has been
taken, or at least before half of the prescribed period has elapsed, in order
that the party who has appealed may not lose his right on account of the little
time that remains.
4. The Same Emperor to Tatianus, Master of the Offices.
We decree by this Imperial lav; that where appeals are taken to the Emperor
permission shall be given to the appellant, as well as the adverse party, to
make use of new allegations or exceptions which may, indeed, not be applicable
to the new proceeding, but arise from and are connected with questions known to
have been brought up before the lower court.
If, however, it should be shown that any allegation was made, or any document
introduced before the lower court, proof of which the party employing it was
not able to present at that time, but which can now be done without delay
before the members of the Imperial Council, they should admit it, in order
that, by doing so, more light may be thrown upon the matters in dispute.
5. The Same Emperor to Tribonian, Qusestor of the Imperial Palace.
As by former laws, in case of appeals, provision was not made for the time
occupied by parties residing at a distance from Our Most Sacred Court, it
appears to Us to be necessary to establish a proper scale for these distances.
Therefore, We order that when any case is appealed from the frontier of Egypt,
or Lydia, or from the Orient, or from both Cilicias, or from the Armenians, as
well as from all Illyria, the term of six months shall be granted, as by the
ancient law, and this shall neither be diminished or increased. When, however,
a case is appealed from any other portion of Our Empire, as, for instance, from
the Departments of Asia, Pontus, or Thrace, to this Royal City, We order that,
instead of the term of six months above mentioned, only that of three shall be
conceded, and the other three terms which follow shall consist of three months,
that is to say ninety-three days, whether the first term of six months or the
other one of three is allowed, according to the enumeration of the places which
We have just made; but the other period of three months, which .is usually
granted by the Council for the purpose of reinstating the party in his right of
appeal, shall remain unaltered, and shall be added to those previously
designated, so that, in one instance, the term allowed shall consist of a year,
and in the other of nine months.
(1) As, in former times, one day was granted by the ancient legislators at the
end of each term, which was designated "The Fatal
Day," and it often happened (as mortals are exposed to many accidents) when
appeals were taken, that either from illness, length of time, or other causes
(which would not be easy to remember or enumerate), the said fatal day passed
without the parties taking advantage of it, and the time for appealing expired,
and the estates of men were thereby endangered, We, for the purpose of
disposing of these injurious vicissitudes of fortune, do order that hereafter
not merely one fatal day shall be reckoned, but if the appellant shall have
appeared at any time within four days preceding the fatal day, or within five
days after that time, and shall bring his action before a competent judge, the
law shall be considered to have been complied with. He should not be expected
to deplore the loss of his case, but he ought to rejoice in the privilege We
bestow upon him, as We are aware that suits are frequently endangered through
an error in calculation as to the time within which the judge should act, which
it is to be hoped will not occur hereafter, because of the remedy afforded
under the present law.
This privilege is applicable to all delays, whether they have been granted by
specially appointed judges or by others, and which the laws have mentioned as
being required to be kept or observed, so that ten fatal days, instead of only
one, shall everywhere be established.
(2) In those instances, however, with reference to which the term of two years
has been prescribed, whenever cases are heard in this Imperial City by the
assembled Council of the Nobles of Our Sacred Palace, We limit the time to one
instead of two years, so that within that period the papers in the case may be
collected, and delivered to Our devoted Secretaries, and the arguments in
opposition be made', if this should be desirable, and the litigants be
compelled to bring the case before Our Imperial Council. A successful party
shall, in accordance with what has already been decided, be permitted to
present his case there at once, without waiting for the expiration of a year,
if he should wish to do so.
(3) When, however, proceedings have been begun in Our Imperial Council, and
have not been concluded on the same day, We permit them to be continued, as it
would be unjust for men to lose their cases for the reason that the Imperial
Council was occupied with matters brought before it by the Emperor.
(4) We think that it is reasonable for what follows to be added to this law,
namely: that if anyone should have taken his case before an appellate judge,
prior to the expiration of the time prescribed by law (whether one or both
parties were present), and, having formulated his appeal, should afterwards
depart and abandon it, and the remainder of the time should pass in inactivity,
and the term of a year elapse after the case was begun, the successful party
not being able to have the judgment executed on account of the case being still
incomplete, and not having the power to bring it to a conclusion, as the
absence of the appellant, did not, of itself, cause it to be terminated, We,
for the purpose of removing this injustice (as the adverse party can, even in
the absence of the appellant, proceed with the case, for
the reason that the special privilege enjoyed by the magistrate having
jurisdiction of an appeal authorizes him to dispose of it when only one party
is present), do hereby order that if the said appellant does not attend to the
case, and conduct it to the end, when he was to blame because the trial did not
proceed, he will forfeit his right of appeal, and the judgment rendered against
him shall remain in full force and effect, just as if an appeal had not been
taken in the first place, unless the said appellant can establish by perfectly
clear evidence that he intended to use every effort to have the case heard, but
was unable to do so, either through the fault of the judge, or for some other
cause over which he had no control. For, under such circumstances, We grant him
another term of a year, and if this should elapse, and the case not be
terminated within that time, We decree that he shall be deprived of the benefit
of an appeal, because he had full power to appear before Us, and complain of
the delay of the judge, and profit by Our indulgence.
(5) In conformity with the above, the same rule shall apply to appeals from the
decisions of Our distinguished Prefects brought before Our Imperial Council, on
the application of one or both parties, not only because of the absence of one
of them, but also on account of the expiration of the terms prescribed by law.
(6) Moreover, if the parties came to the conclusion that their dispute should
be settled by means of a written agreement, neither of them shall have the
right to invoke the aid of an appeal, or take advantage of the lapse of time,
and We decree that a compromise of this kind shall stand, for under such
circumstances, We desire the harshness of the laws to be mitigated by the
agreement of the litigants.
Given at Chalcedon, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof December, during the
fifth Consulate of Decius, 526.
TITLE LLXXIIVV..WHEN IT is NECESSARY TO APPEAL.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Apollinarus and Others.
You allege that the sentence has no force, as it was pronounced in opposition
to a judgment from which no appeal was taken. If you can prove this readily,
without having recourse to an appeal, what has been decided will not have the
authority of a judicial decision.
Published on the eighth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of
Alexander, 223.
2. The Same Emperor to Capilaneis.
When a question with reference to the succession of the deceased arose between
you and your grandmother, and a judge appointed by the Governor of the province
decided that the deceased, although under the age of fourteen years, could make
a will, and by this means you obtained the advantage over your grandmother, it
is evident that the decision having been rendered in violation of a plain rule
of law can
have no force; therefore, in this instance, it will not be necessary to have
recourse to an appeal. If, however, an inquiry was made as to the age of the
deceased, and it was ascertained that he had completed his fourteenth year, and
the judge decided that for this reason he could make a will, and you did not
appeal, or you failed to prosecute the appeal after it was taken, you cannot
again bring up a matter which has been decided.
3. The Emperor Gordian to Ingenuus.
If (as you allege) you were appointed to the duumvirate, and your previous
designation as decurion was suspended on account of the appeal which you made
to the eminent judges against your selection for the latter office, it is clear
that your appointment to the duumvirate will not be prejudiced before your
appeal has been disposed of by the above-mentioned judges.
4. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus, and the Caesar Valerian to Julianus.
As you state that several magistrates have been appointed judges in your case,
and that only one of them has rendered a decision, there does not seem to be
any necessity to appeal, as the decision is not valid in law.
5. The Emperors Cams, Carimis, and Numerianus to Domitian.
Governors can impose fines within certain limits. If the Governor of the
province should exceed his authority, and fine you more than the amount
prescribed by law, there is no doubt that what appears to have been done
illegally is void, and can be set aside without appeal.
Published during the Idesof January, during the Consulate of Carus and Carinus,
283.
6. The Same Emperors to Germanus.
If the judge appointed by the Governor of the province to hear the case is said
not to have rendered his decision on the day that the Governor appointed, but a
considerable time afterwards, in order to avoid the introduction of
technicalities and the delay which will result from a fruitless appeal, the
Governor of the province must decide the entire case, without it being
necessary to have recourse to an appeal.
7. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Nicagora.
It has already been decreed by our Imperial Predecessors that decisions
rendered by corrupt judges for the sake of reward are void in law, even if no
appeal should be taken.
8. The Same Emperors to Constantine.
If your father did not give his consent to your appointment as decurion, and
you were still in the fifteenth year of your age, and the Governor of the
province, having been applied to, should find that you are not eligible to the
said office of decurion, he will revoke the unjust
appointment as being void on account of your age, even if no appeal was taken.
9. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Rufina.
We grant to veterans who, after service in the legions or under the standards
for twenty years, have obtained an honorable and regular discharge, the
privilege of being exempt from onerous public duties. Moreover, desiring to
remunerate the faithful devotion of Our soldiers by this mark of Our
indulgence, We hereby release them from the necessity of appealing, when
judgments are rendered against them.
10. The Emperor Justinian to Menna, Prsetorian Prefect.
For the sake of maintaining unimpaired the honor of judges, where one of the
parties, considering himself injured by their final decision, takes an appeal,
We forbid the other party, who was successful, to appeal from the same judgment
on the ground that he did not receive anything as costs and damages in the
case, or received less than he ought to have done, as he himself admits that
the decision was justly rendered. The judges, however, or the nobles of Our
Imperial Palace, when the amount involved in the case is not of great value,
and they think that the successful party is entitled to his expenses, have
power to grant him a reasonable sum for that purpose, without rendering it
necessary for him to appeal. And as he is permitted by former laws to apply for
this relief, if his adversary should fail to appeal to Our Council, We
nevertheless authorize this to be done, but We forbid any imputation to be cast
upon the court by taking an appeal when it is unnecessary.
Given on the eighth of the Idesof April, ....
TITLE LXV. WHOSE APPEALS SHOULD NOT BE RECEIVED.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Sabinus.
The appeal of a party who, being absent through obstinacy, has had judgment
rendered against him after having been regularly summoned to conduct his case,
cannot be received, if the matter has previously been summarily examined.
Published on the Nonesof July, during the Consulate of Antoninus, Consul for
the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
2. The Emperors Constantius and Constans to Hierocles, Consular of Syria.
You will be careful to note that no homicide, poisoner, malefactor, adulterer,
or any person who has been guilty of manifest violence, who has been convicted
by witnesses, or with his own mouth has confessed that he is guilty of vices
and crimes, shall be heard, if he takes an appeal.
We, however, wish it to be observed that justice requires that where witnesses
have been called, instruments produced, and other evidence offered, and a
judgment has been rendered against the culprit, and the latter does not confess
his guilt, or, terrified by the fear of torture, states anything against
himself, he shall not be denied the right of appeal.
Given on the fifth of the Idesof December, during the Consulate of Leontius and
Sallust, 344.
3. The Emperors Valentinian and Valens to Modestus, Praetorian Prefect.
An appeal from the decision of his own judge is not permitted to any official,
except solely where, in a civil proceeding, he has brought suit before his own
judge with reference to an estate, but any official can, under other
circumstances, appeal from the sentence of the said judge, and the right is
granted him by law to appear by an attorney.
Given on the fourth of the Idesof June, during the Consulate of Valentinian and
Valens, 365.
4. The Emperors Valentinian, Valens, and Gratian to Olybrius, Prefect of the
City.
We order that no appeal shall be taken where satisfaction of a claim is
demanded by the Treasury, or where the payment of public taxes is in question,
or the recovery of a debt, either public or private is involved (provided that
the indebtedness has been clearly proved), so that judicial authority may be
severely exercised against the delinquent if guilty of contumacy.
Published at Rome, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof September, during the
second Consulate of Valentinian and Valens, 368.
5. The Emperors Valens, Gratian, and Valentinian to Thalassius, Proconsul of
Africa.
It has been thoroughly established by the laws and Imperial Constitutions that
an appeal cannot be taken from an execution, unless the officer charged with it
has exceeded the terms of the judgment. When an appeal of this kind is taken,
We think that it should be held that the execution is suspended, and if the
property, which the officer charged with the execution attempted to return, is
movable, it should be taken from the possessor and sequestered after the
appeal, to be restored eventually to the party whom the judge may decide is
entitled to it.
Where, however, execution was issued with reference to either the possession or
the ownership of property, and it is suspended by an appeal, all the profits
acquired therefrom during the time of the appeal, or subsequently obtained,
shall be placed on deposit, and the land left temporarily in the hands of the
appellant. Litigants, however, are notified that, if they appeal either from
the execution of the judgment, or from the judgment itself, and it should
appear that they have done so wrongfully, they shall be fined the sum of fifty
pounds of gold.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof February, during the Con-
sulate of Valens, Consul for the sixth time, and Valentinian, Consul for the
second time, 378.
6. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Hypa-tius, Prefect of
the City.
Anyone who has ventured to appeal against the opening of the will of a deceased
person, or to prevent those who, it is evident, have been appointed heirs, from
being placed in possession of the estate, if the judge having jurisdiction
should hold that the appeal which has been interposed in such a matter ought to
be received, he who appealed so improperly shall pay a fine of twenty pounds of
silver, and the judge who connived at such a base proceeding shall be fined an
equal sum.
Given.on the Nonesof April, during the Consulate of Ausonius, Consul for the
tenth time, and Olybrius, 379.
7. The Same Emperors and Arcadius to Pelagius, Count of Private Affairs.
No appeal shall be permitted either from interlocutory decrees or from other
judicial acts, before a final decision has been rendered in its proper order.
8. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Apollodorus, Count of Private Affairs.
The interest of the public as well as that of Our Private Treasury requires
that claims due to Our Household should not be deferred by the cunning arts of
debtors. Wherefore, We decree that the following rule shall be obeyed, namely:
that those who have been openly and manifestly ascertained to be public debtors
shall be denied the privilege of appeal, and their application for the same
shall be rejected.
Given at Milan, on the third of the Idesof August, during the Consulate of
Arcadius, Consul for the fourth time, and Honorius, Consul for the third time,
396.
TITLE LXVI.
WHERE THE APPELLANT DIES WHILE THE APPEAL is
PENDING.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Julianus.
Even after the death of the party who appealed, his heirs are required either
to continue the case on appeal, or to acquiesce in the
original decision.
Published on the third of the Nonesof December, during the Consulate of
Alexander, 223.
2. The Same to Marcellina.
My Parents ordered that the property of him who, having been accused of a
capital crime, did not appear, and died before the case was heard, should
belong to his heirs.
Published on the third of the Nonesof December, during the Consulate of
Alexander, 223.
3. The Same Emperor to Ulpius.
If anyone sentenced to exile with confiscation of his property should appeal,
and should die while the appeal is pending, although the crime vanished with
his death, still the case involving his property must proceed. For it makes a
great difference whether a capital penalty which deprives the accused of his
property has been imposed (in which case the crime, having been extinguished by
his death, no question with reference to it can survive), or whether the
property is taken, not as the result of condemnation for the crime, but by a
special decision of the Governor, for the defendant being dead, the question of
the crime alone is removed, but that of the disposition of the property
remains.
Published during the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Modestus and Probus,
279.
4. The Emperor Gordian to Alexander.
If your father, having been appointed to the decurionate and appealed, died
while the appeal was pending, the question of the appointment is terminated by
his death.
5. The Same Emperor to Felix.
Although the female slave, with reference to whose ownership a controversy
arose and a decision was rendered against you by the Governor of the province,
died, still, as an appeal was taken in the case, and as you allege that it was
pending along with other cases, this appeal should be heard and decided in its
regular order, so far as the disposal of the peculiumof said slave is
concerned.
6. The Emperor Constantine to Bassus, Prefect of the City.
If one of the litigants should die while the appeal is still pending, his heirs
will be entitled not only to the remaining time which remained to the deceased,
but also to four months in addition. Where, however, a certain time was granted
to the heirs for deliberation, after this has expired, the term of four months
more shall be granted them, in order that they, being ignorant of business, or
having doubts as to whether they should accept the estate or not, may not
suffer loss before acquiring any benefit.
Published at Sirmium, on the twelfth of the Kalendsof June, during the second
Consulate of the Csesars Crispus and Constantine, 331.
TITLE LXVII.
CONCERNING THOSE WHO DO NOT APPEAL THROUGH FEAR OF THE JUDGE.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Dorophanus.
If a judicial decision was rendered against you and you did not invoke the aid
of an appeal, you understand that you must abide by the
decision, for you need fear nothing in the presence of the Imperial
Council.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof June, ....
2. The Emperor Julian to Geminianus.
The privilege of having the right to appeal restored to them is denied to those
who did not apply within the time prescribed by law. Therefore, all who, under
the pretext of fear, fail to appeal from the decisions of Prefects of the City,
Masters of the Offices, Generals of the Army, Proconsuls, Counts, Prefects of
the East, Augustal Vicegerents, or any other magistrates whomsoever, shall be
excluded from reviving their cases. But persons who have suffered violence, and
make a public statement of the facts within the lawful time during which they
have a right to appeal, or show by their statements that they intended to do
so, shall, by reason of this fact, have the support of equity, just as if an
appeal had been taken.
Published on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of
Mamertinus and Nevitta, 362.
TITLE LXVIII. WHERE ONE OR MORE OF THE PARTIES APPEAL.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Licinius.
If it is proved to the court that the same judgment was rendered against you as
against the party whose appeal was decided to be just, and that there was no
separation on account of any difference of facts in the case, he will not fail
to see that you also, who did not appeal, shall profit by the success of the
other party, in accordance with what has frequently been decided.
Published on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof September, ....
2. The Same Emperor to Serenus.
When one of several parties in the same case appeals and his 'appeal is decided
to be just, it will also benefit those who did not appeal. Where, however, one
of them obtained restitution in opposition to the judgment, on the ground of
his age, this will be of no advantage to another who is older, but did not
appeal in his own name.
TITLE LXIX.
WHERE AN APPEAL is TAKEN AGAINST TEMPORARY POSSESSION.
1. The Emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius to Eusig-nius, Praetorian
Prefect.
Where proceedings have been instituted with reference to temporary possession,
even though an appeal may have been taken, the judgment rendered will,
nevertheless, be effective, as the question of
possession must be decided, in order that that of ownership may remain intact.
Given at Milan, on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof December, during the
Consulate of our Prince Honorius, and Evodius, 386.
TITLE LXX.
No ONE SHALL BE PERMITTED TO APPEAL POB THE THIRD TIME IN ONE AND THE SAME
CASE, OR TO REFUSE TO OBEY THE JUDGMENT OP A COURT WHICH HAS BEEN RENDERED
TWICE AND CONFIRMED BY THE DECISION OF A PREFECT.
1. The Emperor Justinian to Menna, Prsetorian Prefect.
When a party has appealed a second time in a case, he shall not be permitted to
do so again with reference to the same matters, in the same suit, or to refuse
to comply with the judgment of the distinguished Praetorian Prefect.
Permission, however, is granted to litigants for whom an arbiter has been
appointed to question the jurisdiction of the judge who appointed him, before
issue had been joined, for a proceeding of this kind has by no means the effect
of an appeal.1
1 Much of the civil procedure of the Romans has been transmitted to posterity,
and some of it, under other designations, survives in the forms of Common Law
practice. The legis actiones,namely sacramenti, judicia postulatio, condictio,
manus injectio,and pignoris capiohave already been described.
These were succeeded by the Formulary System to meet the ever-increasing
requirements of a rapidly growing state, and the resultant altered conditions
of society.
Under this improved method of procedure, the ends of justice were much more
readily attained, and the interests of litigants preserved from injury and
loss, than under the harsh and inflexible rules which have previously
controlled the administration of the law.
It was the practice, before suit was brought, for an attempt at a compromise to
be made, in which the services of the friends and relatives of both parties
were voluntarily enlisted; if their efforts were unsuccessful, a summons, the
in jus vocatio,oral in form, was served upon the defendant in person. Anyone
who happened to be present could be called upon to witness the service, and
this having been accomplished, the plaintiff could bring his adversary into
court by main force, if necessary.
The formula ordinarily consisted of four parts: the demonstratio,or a brief
statement of the plaintiff's case drawn up by the magistrate; the
intentio,which set forth in detail his claim and the grounds on which it was
founded, as fully and concisely as possible; the condemnatio,which empowered
the court to find for either party to the suit; and the adjudicatio,which
conferred upon him the right to award the property in controversy to whichever
of the litigants he might decide was entitled to it. The first of these which
was merely a recitation of facts to define the general character of the action,
was not absolutely essential, and was, at times, dispensed with. The second,
however, contained the vital portion of the proceedings, the issue of law or
fact upon which the entire case was dependent, and it could not be omitted or
curtailed. The adjudicatiowas principally employed by heirs in actions for
partition, for the division of partnership property, and for the settlement of
the boundaries of contiguous estates, when in dispute.
The answer of the defendant, or exceptio,was filed immediately after the
intentio.
Exceptions were either perpetual or peremptory, temporary or dilatory, their
effect being evident from these designations without further explanation.
TITLE LLXXXXII..WHO CAN MAKE AN ASSIGNMENT OP THEIR PROPERTY.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Iren&us.
When the creditors of those who make an assignment of their property are not
paid in full, the latter are not released from liability, for the only
advantage they derive from doing so is that, if judgment should be rendered
against them, they cannot be placed in prison.
Given on the tenth of the ... of December, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and ^lianus, 224.
2. The Emperor Philip and the Csesar Philip to Abascantus.If you are prepared
to pay what you owe, after judgment has been rendered against you in favor of
the State, because you have hastily
If the plaintiff so desired, he could deny the allegations by means of a
replicatio,which the defendant could contest in his turn by a duplicatio,the
latter to be answered by the triplicatioof the plaintiff.
When the pleadings were terminated and accepted by the court, litis contesta-
tio,or joinder of issue, was said to have taken place. This was considered by
Roman jurists as the most critical stage of the proceedings, being their actual
commencement, and imposing new obligations upon both parties and their heirs,
for from this date he who gained the case had a right to claim all profits and
advantages arising from, or connected with, the matter in controversy, and, on
the other hand, corresponding liabilities attached to the defeated party.
Issue having been joined, both parties entered into an undertaking to appear
for trial upon a day designated by the court, a judge having previously been
appointed.
There were two kinds of judgments at civil law, known as "ordinary" and
"extraordinary": the first, where matters of law and fact were heard and
determined by different legal officials; the second, where both were disposed
of by the same magistrate. Ordinary judgments were the only ones recognized by
Roman jurisprudence for almost ten centuries.
It is doubtful whether the right of appeal was admitted under the domination of
the Kings; after that period, however, there is no question as to its existence
.and frequent exercise. During the era of the Republic an appeal could be taken
at any time during the progress of a suit, from one magistrate to another, who
was not even required to be invested with superior jurisdiction. The general
rule under the Empire was that an appeal lay from an inferior magistrate to the
Urban and Prsetorian Prefects, the jurisdiction of the latter being final, as
the Imperial representatives. The Emperor, with this Council, constituted the
court of last resort in appeals from the Urban Prefects, and ultimately the
decisions of the Praetorian Prefects could be reviewed by the sovereign,
through the employment of a proceeding called supplicatio,or petition.
The Roman judicial calendar was divided into dies fasti,on which sessions of
court could be regularly held; dies nefasti,during which all legal and secular
business was suspended, as conflicting with the worship of the gods to whom
these days were consecrated; and dies intercisi,which partook of the nature of
both the others, being partly available for the transaction of worldly affairs,
and partly devoted to the ceremonies of religion, and regarded as half
holidays. The public games celebrated in the spring and fall of each year gave
rise to protracted vacations. It was also the custom not to hold court during
vintage and harvest. Provisions of a similar character with reference to the
observance of holidays under the Christian dispensation were inserted in the
Visigothic Code and Las Siete Partidas.The Emperor Marcus Aurelius fixed the
number of judicial days at two hundred and thirty during the entire year. --- ED.
consented to assign your property, you need have no apprehension that you will
be deprived of your right to the same, if it has not yet been sold.
Published on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of
the Emperor Philip, and Retianus, 246.
3. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to Julianus.
If your father made an assignment of his property on account of civil
liabilities which he had incurred, an inquiry should be made as to his means,
and the estate which you allege you acquired after your emancipation should not
be interfered with. In order that this may be accomplished, you should invoke
the justice of the Governor.
4. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Chilo.
It is a well-known fact that the benefit of the Lex Julia,having reference to
the assignment of property for the benefit of creditors, was extended by the
Constitutions of Our Divine Predecessors to the Provinces, so that such
assignments may take place there, but creditors are not allowed to divide the
said property on their own authority, and hold it by the right of ownership,
but they are obliged to sell it, and can then indemnify themselves as far as
the proceeds permit this to be done.
Therefore, you, having the possession of the property of him who assigned it to
you on the sole ground that you are his creditor, against the rule of law, it
is clear that the claimant will not be barred by the prescription of long time,
but if it is shown that he did not assign the property, but gave it to you in
payment of his debt, the Governor of the province will grant you a hearing with
reference to your ownership of the same.
5. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Myro.
The assignment of property by anyone on account of his being unable to meet
some indebtedness incurred on account of municipal offices or duties, can, by
no means, be admitted, but those who are liable must discharge their
obligations in proportion to the pecuniary resources of each.
6. The Emperor Theodosius.
In every assignment of property, no matter for what cause it is made, the
statement of the assignor alone should be required, and the precise formalities
introduced by former laws are hereby abolished.
(1) The same Emperor said: "In every assignment of property the sole statement
of the intention of the party who makes it is sufficient."
Given on the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Our Prince Honorius, and
Evodius, 386.
7. The Emperor Justinian to Julian, Prsetorian Prefect.As sons under paternal
control can hold property which is forbidden to be acquired by their fathers,
as well as peculium,not only
castrense,but also what they can obtain with the consent of the former, why
should the power to assign their property be refused them? The reason for this
is that those who are under paternal control are understood to possess nothing
in their own right, still, in order that they may not suffer injury, they
should be allowed to make an assignment, for if the head of a family is
permitted to have the weak aid of assignment on account of the fear of some
injury to which he may be subjected, why should We deny this right to children
of either sex who are under paternal control ? For it is a perfectly clear rule
of law that, where those who are under the control of others, subsequently, as
heads of families, acquire anything, this can legally be seized by creditors to
the amount of the indebtedness.
Given at Constantinople, on the tenth of the Kalendsof March, after the fifth
Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes, 531.
8. The Same Emperor to John, Prsetorian Prefect.When, as is customary, a
petition is presented to Us to allow someone to have recourse to the wretched
expedient of making an assignment of his property, and his creditors are given
the choice to grant him five years for payment of their claims, or to accept
the assignment, that by so doing his reputation may be preserved, and the
prospect of all bodily suffering be removed, where some of the creditors are
willing to allow the term of five years, but others insist that an immediate
assignment be made, it was constantly doubted which of them should be heard.
Where a doubt of this kind exists, We think that Our opinion should be readily
accepted by everyone, that is to say, We choose and authorize the more humane,
instead of the harsher course, and decree that the case shall be decided either
by the amount of the indebtedness, or according to the number of the creditors.
Where, however, there is one creditor whose claim is found to be greater than
all the others, that is to say, if all of them were united into one, and the
entire indebtedness computed, it would be greater in amount than the rest
combined, this decision shall prevail, whether the creditor is willing to grant
the time above mentioned or to accept an assignment of the property. But if
there are several creditors who have different claims, the one who has the
largest should be preferred to the others, whether the creditors are equal or
unequal in number, as the case should be decided, not in accordance with the
number of creditors, but by the amount of the indebtedness.
If the claims are found to be equal in amount, but the number of the creditors
is unequal, then the majority of the creditors shall obtain the preference, and
the decision shall be made in compliance with their wishes. When, however, the
debts, as well as the number of creditors are equal, then those shall be
preferred who incline to the more humane course, and do not require an
assignment of the property, but are willing to grant the time, and, with
reference to this choice, no difference shall be observed between hypothecary
and other creditors.
When an assignment is made, the judge shall exercise his authority by dividing
the property among the individual creditors, as prescribed by law, and no
prejudice shall result to any creditor from the delay of five years, so far as
prescription is concerned.
TITLE LXXII.
CONCERNING THE SEIZURE AND SALE OP PROPERTY BY AUTHORITY OF COURT, AND THE
SEPARATION OP THE SAME.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Attica.
With reference to the estate of a deceased person it is clear that the case of
legatees is preferable to that of those to whom his heir has bequeathed
property, since they can sue them, as they could have done his heir, for the
first bequest can be collected as a debt, and what has been left by the
deceased will only be available after the failure to pay it.
2. The Emperor Gordian to Aristo.
It is part of the jurisdiction of the Praetor under the Edict, after it has
been established that the creditors of an estate are entitled to indemnity,
that they shall be granted a separation of the property, whenever they demand
it, and proper cause is shown. Therefore, you will obtain what you desire, if
you can prove that you did not proceed against the heir as representing the
estate, but that you were compelled by necessity to bring him into court.
3. The Same Emperor to Claudiana.
The suit which you have brought against your debtor on the contract which
preceded the assignment of his property is contrary to the rule of law, as
equity furnishes him with the relief of an exception. You can, however, again
bring suit against him, if he has subsequently acquired other property, and the
Governor of the province should authorize you to do so.
4. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Cassars, to Clariana.
The demand which you make, namely, that one of the creditors who has a written
claim against the debtor, and has seized the property of the latter, is obliged
to satisfy all the other creditors, is contrary to law.
5. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Acyndinus.
Ifit is established that the property of your debtor is unoccupied, and it has
not been seized by the Treasury, you can lawfully demand to be placed in
possession by a competent judge.
Given on the seventeenth of the Kalendsof January, under the Consulate of ....
6. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Agattiomarus.
Creditors cannot legally demand that the property of their debtor be
transferred to them in satisfaction of their claims. Therefore, if the other
creditors of your debtor have received property by way of pledge, there is no
doubt that their claims will be preferred to yours, as you have only a written
obligation. If, however, it should be proved that the property of your creditor
is not encumbered to anyone either specially or generally, and the common
debtor himself, or his heir, died without leaving any successor, the interest
of all the creditors will be protected, not by asserting their right to the
ownership of the property, but by obtaining possession of and selling the same,
and each one should receive a share of the proceeds in proportion to the amount
of nis claim.
7. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Domnus.
If your wife has been appointed heir by her uncle, who was her debtor for the
third part of his estate, she will not be prevented from collecting the debt
from his co-heirs in proportion to their two-thirds, as the right of action is
not merged, except so far as the share of the estate to which she succeeded is
concerned. If, however, the co-heirs should be insolvent, and a separation of
property is demanded, she will not be allowed to suffer any loss.
Given on the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the Csesars.
8. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Elida.
The wife of the deceased, or other creditors who have been placed in possession
of the property of the estate for the purpose of preserving it can, by no
means, be considered to have acquired the ownership of the same for this
reason.
9. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Teruncius.
As you allege that he of whom you complain is indebted to you on account of the
administration of your business, having appeared before the Governor of the
province, you can legally bring suit against him. If it is established that he
is your debtor, and that in an attempt to defraud you of your rights, he has
concealed himself, and does not make any defence, you can, by virtue of the
Edict, obtain possession of his property, and the time prescribed by law having
expired, you will not be forbidden by a competent judge to sell the same.
Given on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Diocletian and Maximian.
10. The Emperor Justinian to John, Prsetorian Prefect.
In cases where money was due, and property which belonged to the debtor had not
been hypothecated to secure payment, and he, fearing the harshness of his
creditors, concealed himself, and they, having instituted proceedings with
reference to said property, demand that possession of the same should be
transferred to them, We find that the
question arose among the ancient authorities whether other creditors, to whom
he was also indebted, could share in the possession of the property, and
desiring to remove this doubt, do order by this general Imperial Constitution
that, where not all the creditors, having claims of this kind, but only certain
ones, are placed in possession of the property under a judicial decree, not
only they, but all others having such claims shall enjoy the same privilege,
and have a common interest with those who first obtained possession, and in
whose favor a decree was rendered, as above stated; for what could be more just
than that all those who are admitted to the possession of the property of the
debtor should share an advantage of this description?
But, in order that the negligence of the others may not be a source of
perpetual annoyance to those creditors who are shown to have been more diligent
in the collection of their claims, it seems to Us to be equitable to direct
that the other creditors who are not known, to have exerted such diligence
shall share in the possession of said property, and that they shall be entitled
to the term of two years if they are present and live in the same province in
which those who have possession of it reside, and in case of their absence
shall have the term of four years in which to prove their claims to the
creditors in possession and pay the expenses pro ratato those who obtained the
judgments. Those who incurred such expenses in order to obtain possession of
the property, must prove the amount of the same under oath, because it is an
established rule that they shall be reimbursed in proportion to the amount of
their claims. After the time above mentioned has expired, however, the
creditors who have obtained possession as aforesaid shall not be molested or
subjected to loss, and they can bring any actions against their debtors to
which they think that they are entitled under the laws.
(1) But if those creditors who hold possession should sell the property, either
by virtue of a judicial decree or for any other lawful reason, or if they
should transfer every right which they are known to have in said property to
other persons, after the time which has been prescribed by Us, and receive a
certain sum of money in payment for the same, anything which is found to be in
excess of what is due to them, they will, by all means, be required to seal up
in the presence of notaries, and deposit in the strong box of the Holy Church
of the town in which the said transaction took place, after a statement has
been drawn up by the notaries aforesaid, in the presence of the person who sold
the property or transferred it to other persons, in which not only the amount
of money which was paid for the sale or transfer of said property, as well as
that of the surplus which remained after the discharge of the debt, shall be
set forth, so that if any creditor should subsequently appear and produce
evidence of a debt, he can be paid out of said surplus.
If another creditor should appear, the Governor of the province shall make an
examination of his claim without any charge, and if he should not admit it, the
reverend Stewards or Treasurers of the Holy Church in which the money is
deposited shall not be subjected to any loss or expense, but the creditor shall
be entitled to receive the amount
of his debt, pro rata,,out of the money deposited under the decree of the
Governor. To prevent the creditors from practicing any fraud, machination, or
evasion in the sale or transfer of said property, We order that the statement
drawn up with reference to the transaction shall, with all the customary
formalities, be recorded in the office of the Defender of the City, whether the
amount of the price was equal to that of the debt, or whether it was more, or
less; and this should take place, not only in the presence of notaries, as
aforesaid, but also in that of the most reverend Treasurer of the Church in
whose hands the excess of the money, if there was any, was deposited under
seal.
The vendor, or the person who transferred the property, shall be required to
make oath on the Holy Scriptures that this was not done to favor either the
purchaser or him to whom the property was delivered, and that he did not
fraudulently receive a lower price for the same than it was worth, but the
highest one in fact which, after every effort, it was possible for him to
obtain.
Given at Constantinople, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof November, after the
fifth Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes, 532.
TITLE LXXIII. CONCERNING THE PRIVILEGE OF THE TREASURY.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Eutropia.
If the property of your husband was seized by the Treasury for the payment of
claims incurred during his administration as Chief Centurion of the Triarii,
any of it that you can prove beyond question to be yours shall be separated
from the rest, and returned to you.
2. The Same Emperor to Valeriana.
Although your former husband may have had judgment rendered against him on
account of your dowry, still, if he made a contract with the Treasury before
his property was encumbered to you, the claim of the Treasury will be preferred
to yours. If, however, he became liable to the Treasury after you had obtained
a lien on his property, the claim of the Treasury to said property will not
take precedence of yours.
Published on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of
Antoninus, Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
3. The Same Emperor to Juliana.
If, when you paid money for your husband, you did not have the claim of the
Treasury transferred to you, and did not receive a house or any other property
from him by way of security, you will be entitled to a personal action, but
your claim by which you allege that the taxes have again been farmed out to him
cannot be preferred to that of the Treasury, as, under the terms of that
contract, whatever property he has or did have at the time the agreement was
entered into, is encumbered to the Treasury by the right of pledge. Therefore,
with the exception of the indemnity to which the Treasury is entitled, you
will not be prevented from suing your debtor, in the ordinary way, for the sum
which you have paid in his behalf to the Treasury.
Published on the third of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of
Antoninus, Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
4. The Same Emperor to Quintus.
If the debtor, to whom you state that the land in question belonged, sold it
before he owed anything to the Treasury, My attorney will see that you are not
subjected to annoyance on this account, for even though he afterwards became
the debtor of the Treasury, still, any property which did not belong to him at
that time cannot, for this reason, be encumbered to the Treasury by the right
of pledge.
Published on the third of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Lsetus,
Consul for the second time, and Cerealis, 216.
5. The Emperor Alexander to Menna.
If the money which a creditor received from his debtor should afterwards be
decided to justly belong to the Treasury, it will be due without interest,
because it was acquired, not under a contract for interest, but as being the
property of the Treasury by special privilege.
Published on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof June, during the Consulate of
Fuscus and Dexter, 226.
6. The Emperor Gordian to Severiana.
As you yourself state that your father was a debtor of the Treasury, and you
allege that, at the time of your marriage, he gave you possession of certain
property, you understand that the Attorney of the Treasury can institute
proceedings to revoke said gift, on the ground that said property was pledged
to the Treasury.
Published on the Nonesof June, during the Consulate of Sabinus and Venustus,
241.
7. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus, and the Csssar Valerian, to Diodorus.
If, after you have paid for a debtor to the Treasury the balance which he owed,
and a competent judge has assigned to you the right of the Treasury, and
deprived the creditors (to whom the Treasury had a preferred claim) of the
property in your favor, they cannot molest you for the reason that you hold it
by this title.
Published on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof June, during the Consulate of
^milianus and Bassus, 260.
TITLE LXXIV. CONCERNING THE PRIVILEGE OF DOWRY.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Firm/us.
You should know that the dotal privilege which women avail themselves of in an
action of dowry does not pass to their heirs.
Published on the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Pompei-anus and Avitus,
210.
TITLE LXXV.
CONCERNING THE REVOCATION OF CONTRACTS BY WHICH
PROPERTY HAS BEEN ALIENATED FOR THE PURPOSE OF
DEFRAUDING CREDITORS.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Cassia.
An heir who, after having entered upon the estate, transfers it to another,
remains liable to the creditors of the estate. Therefore, if he did this for
the purpose of defrauding you, and you have seized and sold his property in the
ordinary way, you can revoke the contract by which it is proved that the
property was fraudulently alienated.
Published on the second of the Idesof October, during the Consulate of
Antoninus, Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Symphoriana.
If you did not accept the estate of your father, his creditors cannot proceed
against you on account of the property which was given to you by way of dowry,
when it is not shown that the said property was previously pledged to them,
unless, after the estate of the deceased was found to be insufficient to pay
his debts, it should be proved that the dowry had been constituted for the
purpose of defrauding his creditors.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Ctesars, to Acindynus.
If you refused to accept the estate of your father, and none of the property of
the same was transferred to you as a donation for the purpose of defrauding
creditors, the Governor of the province will not permit you to be sued by the
private creditors of your father.
4. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Epagathus.
It is a well-known rule of law that the sons of a debtor have no power to
revoke contracts made by their father for the purpose of defrauding his
creditors.
Published on the tenth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate
of the above-mentioned Emperors.
5. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Crescentius.
It is a well-recognized legal principle that the interests of creditors shall
be protected against a person who, after judgment has been rendered against
him, does not satisfy it within the time prescribed; and no defence is made by
bringing an action in factumagainst the purchaser, where property has been sold
after the remaining assets have been found to be insufficient, and the
purchaser knowingly and fraudulently bought the property, or against him who
has possession under a lucrative title, whether he was aware of the fraud or
not.
Ordered on the tenth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors.
6. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Menandra.
If you have formally released an obligation, you are advised that the right to
sue is only granted by the Perpetual Edict against the party guilty of fraud,
within the year during which he could be compelled to make payment, or
committed a fraudulent act by which he became unable to do so.
