# -*- mode: org -*-

* BOOK IX.
* TITLE I. CONCERNING THOSE WHO CANNOT BRING AN ACCUSATION.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Sylvanus.
You should first answer the charges of murder and wounding of which you are
accused by your adversary, because they are more serious, and then the judge
will determine according to the circumstances of the case whether you shall be
permitted to accuse your adversary, even though you may have been the first to
bring an accusation.
Published on the fifth of the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Tertullus
and Clement, 196.
2. The Same Emperors to Ingenuus.
If your guardians or curators consider the receipts, by means of which
Secundinus says he can prove that the money has been paid to
Eugenius, to be suspicious and false, they will not be prevented from bringing
an accusation for forgery in their own names (as this cannot be done in the
name of another), for neither guardians nor curators, who administer the
affairs of their wards or minors, at their own risk, are readily branded with
infamy, unless their guilt of malicious prosecution is clearly apparent tc the
judge.
Published on the twelfth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of
Antoninus and Geta, 206. 3. The Emperor Alexander to Rufus.
Those who intend to bring an accusation of a public crime should not be
permitted to do so, unless they have first committed the charge to writing, and
have furnished a surety that they will prosecute. If, however, after having
furnished security, they should not appear, they shall be notified under the
Edict that they must come and conduct the case, and if they do not appear,
extraordinary measures should be taken to punish them according to the
discretion of the judge; and they shall also be compelled to pay the costs
which those who have been summoned have incurred, as well as the travelling
expenses of the latter.1
1 The king was the original, supreme criminal magistrate in whom was solely
vested the right to inflict capital punishment and confiscate property.
Jurisdiction of minor offices was delegated to members of the Senate who were,
as occasion required, especially designated for this purpose. As in every age
the infancy of nations, the regal, autocratic power exerted in the hearing and
determining of criminal cases was derived from the military supremacy attaching
to the office of sovereign as head of the army.
The consuls succeeded the kings in the cognizance of crimes. The increasing
influence of the people, however, eventually deprived them of much of this
authority, which then became vested first in the Comitia curiata,and then in
the Comitia centuriata,the popular assemblies of the capital of the Roman
world. The power of the latter body was, for convenience, ultimately
transferred to a jury presided over by the Praetor. The Senate, also,
constituted a High Court of Justice for the prosecution of offences, which on
account of their magnitude or unusual character seriously menaced the welfare
or existence of the State; still, even under such circumstances, it very rarely
personally exercised its authority, but delegated it to some magistrate of high
rank, who was empowered to conduct the investigation and render judgment.
The criminal procedure of the Romans was at first, as well as for a
considerable period afterwards, circumscribed by no well-defined collection of
rules or established precedents. No laws constituting crimes, and prescribing
their punishments, had been passed. Even custom, usually so authoritative in
the absence of appropriate legislation, was frequently disregarded. Every case
was tried separately and independently, and the penalty inflicted was entirely
in the discretion of the judge, whose sentence was presumed to be in accordance
with what the nature of the offence demanded. Whenever judicial authority was
delegated, it only endured until the termination of that particular proceeding.
It was by slow and irregular steps that criminal jurisprudence became finally
embodied in a code, whose enactments fixed with some degree of certainty what
had formerly been regulated by the arbitrary and irresponsible conclusions of
the royal or magisterial personages, not infrequently prejudiced and
incompetent, to whom was long committed the vital interests of both patrician
and plebeian in the administration of justice.
Under the Republic, the Senate had, strictly speaking, no direct criminal
jurisdiction over Roman citizens. It could, however, prosecute and punish
unusu-
Published on the third of the Nones ofFebruary, during the Consulate of
Alexander, 223.
4. The Same Emperor to Dionysius.
If your wife thinks that the death of your cousin should be avenged, let her
appear before the Governor of the province.
Published on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of
Alexander, 623.
5. The Same Emperor to Marcellina.
Awoman is not permitted by the Decree of the Senate to accuse the defendant of
forgery under the Lex Cornelia,,unless the property belongs to her. Therefore,
as your sons have guardians and curators, they should determine whether the
instruments by means of which you allege the adversary of your sons has
profited should be denounced as forged.
Published during the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of Alexander, 223.
6. The Same Emperor to Probus.
You cannot renew the accusation which you allege that you have withdrawn.
Published on the fifth of the Nonesof May, during the Consulate of Julian,
Consul for the second time, and Crispinus, 225.
ally serious offences such as cases of rebellion and sedition, both in the city
itself and in the provinces.
The prefects were, under Imperial rule, the judges possessing the most
extensive criminal jurisdiction. The aediles, in addition to their other
numerous duties, took cognizance of breaches of the law of comparatively
trifling importance. During the Empire, the autocratic character of the
sovereign rendered the decisions of the Senate nugatory when they did not fully
meet with his approval, an event of extremely rare occurrence, as the imperial
will, which dominated that august body, was generally known, and impliedly
possessed the power of a mandate, which few, indeed, would venture to
disregard.
The quxstio,or trial, was originally conducted before a commission appointed to
hear each offence; afterwards the citizens designated for this purpose served
for a specified time, usually a year, and the tribunals over which they
presided were styled qusestiones perpetuse.
Every quxstiowas decided by jurors whose number was fixed by the enactments
under which the proceedings were conducted. The information at our disposal
shows that this varied from thirty-two to four hundred and fifty, the latter
being required when the defendant was accused of abusing his official authority
for purposes of extortion. The members of the jury were, in the beginning,
taken from the Senate; afterwards, however, Roman citizens were charged with
this duty, and their names were publicly inscribed by the Praetor upon the
albumin the Forum. These jurors were styled judices selecti.
When the time for trial arrived, a struck jury was empaneled. The accuser
selected a certain member, and then the defendant exercised this privilege.
Under the Cornelian Law, only three could be challenged by each party, but
afterwards the laws authorized the rejection of the entire panel by either
side, a proceeding corresponding to the "challenge of the array" at Common Law,
which, no doubt, deduced its origin from the practice of the Roman tribunals.
The jurors were regularly sworn to render their verdict according to the law
and the evidence, as justice might dictate; and the judge specially appointed
to preside in the case was also, at the same time, obliged to make oath to
7. The Same Emperor to Felix.
Ifshe who has accused you of a crime should delay to prosecute, a competent
judge must fix a certain time for her to do so; and if she fails to proceed
within that time, she will be understood to have abandoned the case.
Published on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Agricola and Clement, 231.
8. The Emperor Gordian to the Soldier Gaius.
Soldiers are not forbidden to bring an accusation of a public crime, if they do
so for an injury committed against either themselves or their relatives; hence
We permit you to prosecute the murderer of
your cousin.
Published on the seventeenth of the Kalendsof August, during
the Consulate of Pius and Pontianus, 239.
9. The Same Emperor to Severia.
A competent judge will understand that she who wishes to prosecute for, and
avenge the death of her son, should not be permitted to file the accusation
before she proves that she is his mother.
Published on the sixth of the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of Gordian
and Aviola, 240. perform the duty demanded by the requirements and
responsibilities of the judicial
office.
In compliance with the rule authorized by Justinian, a witness could not be
forced to incriminate himself: "Deferre se nemo cogitur."Before the days of the
Empire, torture could only be applied to slaves, and under certain
restrictions, but afterwards, both the witnesses and the defendant might be
subjected to it. It was only tolerated in order to strengthen other evidence or
presumptions already existing, and could not be inflicted with excessive
severity.
After the evidence had been introduced and the arguments heard, the judge
demanded the verdict, which, in early times, was given by each juror viva
voce.The ballot was afterwards substituted for the oral vote as being more
convenient and satisfactory. There were three ways in which a juror could
render his verdict. If he wished to vote for conviction, he simply inscribed
the letter "C," (condemno,I convict) upon the tablet given him for that
purpose; a vote for acquittal was indicated by an "A," (absolvo, "Iacquit") ;
if he desired to evade responsibility, or was unable to decide, he wrote "N.
L." (non liquet,"It is not clear"); and a sufficient number of such ballots
practically effected a dismissal of the case (ampliatio),which could be tried
again with the consent of the Prsetor, upon payment of costs. Unanimity of the
jurors was not requisite for the finding of a verdict, only a majority being
necessary.
Appeals were, in the course of time, permitted to be made to the Emperor, or to
certain courts invested with appellate jurisdiction. Precipitation from the
Tarpeian Rock, decapitation, scourging, burning alive, crucifixion, and hanging
were the penalties for capital crimes. Minor infractions of the law were
expiated by banishment, penal servitude, whipping, fines, and infamy. A culprit
could usually escape death, either before or after trial, by going into
voluntary exile. There is no mention by Cicero of conviction of a capital
offense being followed by execution in his time.
Much obscurity characterizes the administration of criminal justice in Italy
and the provinces. It is known, however, that a capital case could not be
disposed of in any Italian court outside of Rome. --- ED.
10. The Same Emperor to Buccatrahius.
If you desire to prosecute anyone for crimes committed against yourself or your
relatives, commit your accusation to writing with the legal formalities, in
order that you may have the Governor of the province preside in the case.
Published on the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Gordian and Aviola,
240.
11. The Emperor Philip and the Csssar Philip to Saturninus and Others.
As you allege that the adverse party purposely burned your property, you can
prosecute him under the Lex Cornelia de Sicariis.
Published on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of
Peregrinus and ^milianus, 245.
12. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Cdssars, to Corinthia.
Awoman is not permitted to bring an accusation of a public crime except in
certain cases, that is to say, where the injury is committed against her or her
relatives, and she is expressly authorized by the ancient law to do so; nor is
such an accusation required to be committed to writing. Therefore, if you apply
to the Governor of the province, he will, in the first place, examine whether
the crime is one of those for which a woman is not forbidden to prosecute.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.
13. The Same Emperors and Czesars to Asclepius.
Where one brother brings the accusation of a serious or capital crime against
another, he not only should not be heard, but he should be condemned to the
penalty of exile.
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of the
Caesars.
14. The Same Emperors and Ciesars to Mlia.
If your natural love and affection do not prevent you, you can bring an
accusation against your son before the Governor of the province, on account of
the attempt which you allege he made against your life.
Ordered on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of the
Caesars.
15. The Same Emperors and Caesars to Lupio.
If your reputation is good, you are by no means forbidden to bring a criminal
accusation, of course at the risk of being punished for malicious prosecution.
Ordered on the third of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of the
Caesars.
16. The Same Emperors and Caesars to Calluticus.Your desire coincides with the
rule of law which does not permit a third accusation to be brought by him who
has previously brought
two others, unless he desires to institute prosecution for an offence committed
against himself or his relatives.
Ordered at Nicomedia, on the twelfth of the Kalendsof December, during the
Consulate of the Caesars.
17. Extract from a Sentence of the Same Emperors and Csesars.
Published on the fifth of the Idesof January, during the Consulate of the
Emperors Diocletian and Maximian.
We think that it is unjust, and far from consonant with the auspicious events
of Our century, that Thaumasius should have the power to accuse him in whose
house (although he was freeborn) it is proved that he had remained from
infancy. Therefore the accusation of crime which he has brought against
Symmachus shall not be entertained. If, however, the said Thaunasius should
wish to bring a civil action him before the Governor of the province, he can do
so.
18. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Julianus.
If you wish to accuse your sister of a minor offence, you will not be prevented
from doing so in the tribunal of the Governor of the province, by whom the said
offence rashly committed will be punished
with the proper penalty.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Diocletian,
Consul for the ninth time, and Maximian, Consul for the eighth time, 304.
19. The Emperors Valentinian, Valens, and Gratian to Lauditius, Prefect of
Sardinia.
Accused persons are denied permission to accuse their prosecutors of a crime of
equal or less gravity, unless it was committed against them or their relatives,
before they themselves have, in accordance with the provisions of the ancient
laws, been acquitted of the offence with which they are charged; but they can
file their information even while the accusation against them is still pending.
Given on the day before the Idesof August, during the Consulate of Gratian,
Consul for the third time, and Equitius, Consul for the fifth time, 374.
20. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Eutychianus, Prse-torian Prefect.
If a retainer or slave belonging to someone's household should appear as an
informer against, and an accuser of the latter, to whose family he belonged and
whose society he enjoyed, which accusation would cause him to lose his
reputation, his life, and his property, he shall be struck with the avenging
sword before the witnesses are produced, and the examination of the case takes
place, or even before the criminal accusation has been begun; for it is better
to put a summary end to such a criminal charge than for it to be heard. We,
however, except from this rule the crime of high treason alone.
Given at Constantinople, on the sixth of the Idesof November, during the
Consulate of Csesarius and Atticus, 397.
IIxxOO
21. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to the Consuls, Pr%-tors, Tribunals of
the People, and Senate, Greeting:
If freedmen should presume to accuse those who have manumitted them, or their
heirs, they shall be liable to the same punishment inflicted under similar,
circumstances upon slaves, and they shall pay the penalty before their
forbidden accusation has begun.
Given on the seventh of the Idesof August, during the Consulate of
Asclepiodotus and Marinianus, 423.

* TITLE II.
CONCERNING ACCUSATIONS AND DENUNCIATIONS IN WRITING.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Martian.
The Governor of the province will not be ignorant that those who remove
landmarks should be punished with extraordinary severity.
Published on the third of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of
Alexander, 223.
2. The Same Emperor to Syrus.
Where a slave is accused of any crime whatsoever, his master can defend him,
appear in court, and answer the charge of his accuser. But after the proof of
the crime has been established, not the master himself but -the slave shall be
condemned, for a master is only permitted to defend his slave in order to be
able to make suitable allegations in his behalf.
Published on the eleventh of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Alexander, 222.
3. The Same Emperor to Stephanides.
The laws relating to public prosecutions permit persons who are accused of
capital crimes, and who are absent, to be defended by an attorney.
Published on the fourth of the Nonesof November, during the Consulate of
Maximus, Consul for the second time, and .^Elianus, 224.
4. The Emperor Gordian to Archelaus.
In case the accusers are absent, and have not failed to be present in court
through contumacy, and the Governor of the province, having been applied to by
the party accused, has, without hearing the case, rendered a decision that he
against whom you have complained shall be discharged, the criminal accusation
will still continue to exist, as it was not dismissed through the contumacy or
neglect of the accusers; and the said criminal case shall be heard by the same
judge or his successor, in the ordinary way.
Published on the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of Gordian, Consul for the
second time, and Pompeianus, 242.
5. The Same Emperor to Paulinus.
He who brings an unjust accusation is none the less liable for a crime or an
atrocious injury, for the reason that he alleges that another directed him to
make it; for in this instance it is well established that proceedings can be
instituted not only against the principal guilty party, but that his mandator
is also personally responsible.
Published on the third of the Idesof September, during the Consulate of
Gordian, Consul for the second time, and Pompeianus, 242.
6. The Same Emperor to Avidianus.
It is an ancient rule of law that a person who is absent cannot be accused of a
capital crime;1 but it is only necessary for the accusation to be recorded, if
the defendant is not present. Therefore, as you, while absent and ignorant that
you had ever been accused of any crime, have, as you state, been unjustly
sentenced to the mines by the Governor of the province, without, as you assert,
ever having been able to learn that you had been prosecuted; in order that the
truth may now be ascertained in your presence, do not fail to appear before the
Praetorian Prefect, who will take cognizance of any innovation contrary to the
provisions of the Imperial Constitutions which may have taken place, and will
correct it in conformity with justice.
Published on the fourth of the Nonesof April, during the Consulate of Arianus
and Pappus, 244.
7. The Same Emperor to Proculus.
It is a well-known fact that denunciations of crimes made by public officials
before Governors should be examined without the ordinary formalities required
in the case of accusations. The judge, however, should not fail to carefully
investigate the grounds of the accusation, especially if it is suspected of
being false, or is well known to be such.
Published on the eighth of the Idesof January, during the Consulate of
Peregrinus and .ZEmilianus, 245.
8. Extract from the Imperial Letters of the Emperors Diocletian and Maximian.
If anyone should think that he has sustained an injury from another, and
desires to make a complaint against him, he should not apply to the
stationarii,2but should appear before the Governor, and either file his
statement, or cause his complaint to be recorded.
Published without date or designation of Consulate.
1 "Nemo ina/uditur nee summonitus condemnari debet, si non sit contumax." --- ED.
2The stationariiwere officials stationed (as the name implies) everywhere
throughout the Roman Empire, whose duty it was to collect information
concerning criminal offences, and transmit it to the proper authorities to be
acted upon. No written accusation or indictment was necessary under such
circumstances, but the prosecutor was compelled, no matter how distant he migth
be, to appear in court, and produce evidence in support of the charge. --- ED.
9. The Same Emperors to Honoratus.
Anyone who has been charged with a public crime, cannot again be accused of the
same crime by another person.1 If, however, several offences arise from the
same act, and complaint is only made of one of them, it is not forbidden for an
accusation of another to be filed by some other individual. The judge will
grant a hearing for both crimes, as he will not be permitted to pass sentence
for one of them separately before a thorough examination of the other has taken
place.
Published on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Bassus and Quintianus, 289.
10. The Same Emperors and C&sars to Ursa.
Anyone who holds out the hope of acquittal to an accused person, whose fate is
under the power and in the hands of the judge, does not, by this unlawful
promise, commit a crime of less gravity than that committed by someone who in
violation of public order hires him to do this.
Published on the third of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of
Diocletian, Consul for the fourth time, and Maximian, Consul for the third
time, 290.
11. The Same Emperors and Csssars to the Children of Our Beloved Crispina.
If anyone thinks that he ought, in accordance with public law, to accuse
someone of the crime of homicide, who has already been charged with the same
offence by another, who was unable to prove him guilty, he must first show that
there was collusion, and that the defendant was acquitted for this reason; as
this has very properly been prescribed by Our predecessors, the Emperors.
If, however, he should not think that this can be done, you can compel him to
prosecute the shepherds and robbers for the crime, and have it decided in your
court, and if it is apparent that it was committed by the accused, he will be
liable to public punishment under the law.
Given on the eighth of the Idesof April, during the Consulate of Annibalianus
and Asclepiodotus, 292.
12. The Same Emperors and Csssars to Aurelius.
An innocent person cannot incur the risk of prosecution where someone has
voluntarily committed suicide.
Ordered at Sirmium, on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof June, during the
Consulate of the above-mentioned Emperors.
1 "Nemo debet bis punire pro uno delicto."This salutary and equitable rule is
undoubtedly the original source whence is derived the provision of our organic
law prohibiting any person "for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy
oofflife or limb," as set forth in Article V of the Constitution. --- ED.
13. The Emperors Valerian, Gratian, and Theodosius to Marini-anus, Vicegerent
of Spain.
If anyone should think that slaves ought to be accused, he must not subject
them to bodily torture before filing a written accusation
against them.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of
Merobaudus, Consul for the second time, and Saturninus.
14. The Same Emperors and Arcadius to Cynegius, Prsetorian Prefect.
One and all judges are hereby notified that, in the prosecution of public
crimes, they ought not to make use of decrees pronounced in other cases, or
place implicit reliance upon statements drawn up by public officials, but
should endeavor to ascertain the truth in each particular case.
Given at Constantinople, on the day before the Kalendsof May, during the
Consulate of Arcadius and Bauto, 385.
15. The Same Emperors to Tatianus, Prsetorian Prefect, Sequel to Other Matters
Stated.
It is proper for men of high rank to appear personally in court, when their
presence in criminal cases is demanded by a written accusation; although, in
actions involving money, they can make their defence by means of attorneys.
Given at Milan, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate
of Valentinian, Consul for the fifth time, and Neoterius, 390.
16. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Pasiphilus.
In the trial of criminal cases it is proper that those accusations should first
be heard which involve the most serious offences, and are prior in order of
time, so that the authority of the law may terrify one or the other of the
parties; and if this rule should be violated, those whose duty it is to preside
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of five pounds of gold.
Given on the eighth of the Idesof January, during the Consulate of Olybrius and
Probinus, 395.
17. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to the Consuls, Praetors, Tribunes of
the People, and Senate, Greeting:
We order that the provisions heretofore enacted in the laws with reference to
accusations shall be observed, so that whoever is charged with a capital crime
shall not immediately be considered guilty, merely because he has been accused,
in order that innocence may not be unjustly punished; but that the accuser
shall appear in court, give the name of the defendant, make the accusation in
writing, and become, as it were, a prisoner (proper consideration being had to
his rank), to prevent him from making false statements with impunity, as the
same punishment should be inflicted upon one bringing a false accusation as the
latter intended should be imposed upon the innocent party. Let no one flatter
himself that he can hope for pardon after having confessed under torture that
he was guilty of crime, or that any attention will be paid to his false
denunciation of persons of superior rank, or to any made against his enemies,
whom he desires to involve with himself in a common fate, or expect that he can
escape, either through the efforts or the privileges of those whom he named,
for the provisions of the ancient law require that he shall be examined only
with reference to offences of which he has confessed himself guilty, but not
concerning those in which others are implicated, and therefore no one who
admits that he is guilty of crime shall be examined as to the complicity of
others.
Given at Ravenna, on the eighth of the Idesof August, during the Consulate of
Asclepiodotus and Marinianus, 423.

* TITLE III.
CONCERNING THE PRODUCTION AND TRANSFER OF PERSONS ACCUSED OF CRIME.
1. The Emperors Valentinian and Valens to Valentinian.
When a soldier is found to have committed a public crime in a province, the
Governor must take him into custody, and make a report setting forth the nature
of the case, and the rank of the party implicated.
Given at Milan, on the twelfth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate
of Valentinian and Valens, 365.
2. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Eutro-pius, Prsetorian
Prefect.
No accused person shall, under any circumstances, be confined in prison before
he has been convicted. If he should happen to be a long distance away, the
accusation shall not be received before the accuser formally agrees that, if he
should fail to legally prove the charge, he will submit to the penalty which
the other party would have suffered if he had been found guilty. A sufficient
time, consisting of not less than thirty days, shall be granted by the judge of
the district to the accused, for the purpose of arranging his business; and no
more shall be granted to him who has been ordered to produce the defendant.
After he has appeared in court, and an advocate has been appointed to defend
him, the case shall be heard, and, whether the guilt or the innocence of the
accused is established, he and his prosecutor must be treated in the same
manner, without any distinction.
Given at Constantinople, on the third of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of Gratian, Consul for the fifth time, and Theodosius.
3. The Emperors Valentinian, Theodosii, and Arcadius to Dre-panius, Proconsul
of Africa.
We order that no one shall be produced in court unless the judge has directed
that this shall be done.
Given at Milan, on the Nonesof February, during the Consulate of Valentinian,
Consul for the third time, and Neoterius, 390.

* TITLE IV. CONCERNING THE CUSTODY OF ACCUSED PERSONS.
1. The Emperor Constantius to Florentinus.
As soon as the defendant is produced in any case, whether an accuser is
responsible for his appearance, or whether a public official has caused his
arrest, his trial must at once proceed, so that if he is guilty, he may be
punished, and if he is innocent, he may be discharged.
When the accuser is absent, or the presence of the accomplices of the accused
is considered necessary, they should be found as soon as possible. In the
meantime, however, handcuffs should not be placed on the defendant, which bind
him closely, but he should be placed in longer chains (if the nature of the
offence demands the harshness of chains); so that he may not be subjected to
suffering, but still remain in safe custody. He should not, however, be
confined in a dark dungeon, but where he can be reached by light, and enjoy it;
and, as night demands double vigilance, he ought to be lodged in the vestibule
of a prison, or some other healthy place, and, when day returns, he should
immediately be brought out into the light, as soon as the sun rises, in order
that he may not die through imprisonment, which is considered unfortunate in
the case of innocent persons, but not sufficiently severe so far as those who
are guilty are concerned.
The following rule must also be observed, namely, that it shall not be lawful
for those who perform the duties of jailers, or their attendants, to sell their
cruelty to accusers, by destroying innocent persons through confinement in
narrow dungeons, or, by delaying the hearing of their cases, cause them to
waste away with disease; for a judge is not only liable to loss of reputation,
but he will also incur serious risk if he does not punish with the penalty of
death any jailer or his attendants, who, through negligence, or for any other
reason whatever, permit anyone to remain in prison a longer time than he
should, or to punish by starvation.
Given on the day before the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of
Constantine, Consul for the sixth time, and the Caesar Constantius, 353.
2. The Same Emperor and Csesar to Evagrius, Prsetorian Prefect.
Where anyone is accused of such an offence or crime as to render him worthy of
being confined in a filthy and narrow cell, he shall be publicly heard, and it
must be decided whether he is liable to imprison-
ment, and afterwards, if it appears probable that he has committed the crime
with which he is charged, he should be conducted back to prison. In this way
information of crimes which have been perpetrated is obtained by testimony
given in public, so that some restraint may be imposed upon judges who are
prone to the exercise of unreasonable severity.
Given at Heraclia, on the third of the Nonesof February, during the Consulate
of Constantine, Consul for the seventh time, and the Caesar Constantius, Consul
for the second time, 354.
3. The Same Emperor to Acindynus, Prietorian Prefect.
As the same prison is ordinarily used for the confinement of criminals of both
sexes, We decree, by this law, that even if the nature of the punishment
requires that those of both sexes should be incarcerated together, still it is
ordered that males and females shall not be placed in the same cells.
Given on the Nonesof April, during the Consulate of Acindynus and Proculus,
340.
Extract from Novel 134, Chapter IX. Latin Text,
At present, under the new law, We do not permit any woman to be sent to prison,
locked up, or placed in custody, on account of money due the Treasury, or in
any civil case, or for the commission of any crime; but if an action has been
brought against her to collect a debt due to the Treasury, or to a private
individual, she can legally answer by her husband, or by anyone else. Where,
however, he either refuses to answer, or to conduct her case, execution can be
issued against her property. If the offence is of such a character as to
require her to be placed in custody, and she can furnish a surety, he shall be
responsible for her appearance. If she should swear that she cannot furnish a
surety, she can take the oath to appear in court when called upon to do so.
If the crime of which she is accused is of the most serious description, she
shall be placed in a monastery, or a nunnery, or delivered up to certain women
by whom she shall be guarded.
When judges who do not observe these rules are of superior rank, they shall pay
a fine of twenty pounds of gold, and if they are of inferior station they shall
pay a fine of ten. Their subordinates, who have failed to discharge their duty
in the cases above mentioned, shall be deprived of their offices and sent into
exile.
4. The Emperors Valentinian, Valens, and Gratian to Probus, Pr&-torian Prefect.
The custody and care of imprisoned persons devolves upon the jailer, who must
not think that some abject and vile dependent will be responsible, if a
prisoner should, in any way escape, for We desire that he himself shall suffer
the same penalty to which the prisoner who escaped is shown to have been
liable.
When, however, the jailer is necessarily absent from his post, We order that
his assistant shall be bound to exercise the same vigilance, and shall be
punished with the same severity.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Gratian,
Consul for the fifth time, and Probus, 371.
5. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Eutro-pius, Prietorian
Prefect.
We clearly and definitely decree that persons who are in prison shall, if
convicted, immediately suffer the penalty to which they are sentenced, or that,
having been discharged, they shall not be oppressed by further confinement.1
We also decree that the jailer shall, every thirty days, make a statement of
the number of prisoners in his custody, the nature of their different offences,
and the rank and age of the prisoners.
If he should fail to do this, We order that he shall pay twenty pounds of gold
to Our Treasury, and We decree that a negligent judge, or one who has only
manifested weakness and is unfitted for the office which he has obtained, shall
be fined ten pounds of gold.
Given at Constantinople, on the third of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of Gratian, Consul for the fifth time, and Theodosius, 380.
6. This Law is not Authentic.

* TITLE V. CONCERNING THE PROHIBITION OF PRIVATE PRISONS.
1. The Emperor Zeno to Ba^ilius, Prsetorian Prefect.
We order that no one whosoever shall, under any circumstances, be permitted to
have a private prison either in the magnificent city of Alexandria, or in the
province of Egypt, or in any other part of Our Empire, or on his own land or in
any of his houses, and We direct the illustrious Augustal Prefect, and the
distinguished Governors of all the provinces, in the future to use every effort
possible to repress the repeatedly mentioned insolence of unprincipled men who
are guilty of such an offence. For, by this most salutary law, the eminent
Augustal Prefect and the Governors of provinces shall unquestionably incur the
penalty of high treason, if, having learned that a crime of this kind has been
committed, they do not vindicate the offended majesty of the Emperor.
Moreover, all high officials are rendered liable to punishment for treason if,
as soon as they have ascertained that this prohibited offence has been
committed anywhere, they do not, at once, inform the judges under their
jurisdiction, in order that the said atrocious crime may be
1 Imprisonment was not a penalty among the Romans, but merely a means to insure
the safe-keeping of a defendant, "Career ad homines custodiendos, non ad
puniendos, dari debet." --- ED.
punished; for it is clear that those who have committed a crime of this kind
should be subjected to the extreme penalty, not only in accordance with the
provisions of the ancient laws and constitutions, but also as guilty of high
treason.
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of
Longinus, 486.


BOOK IX.
(Continued.)




* TITLE VI. WHERE THE DEFENDANT OR THE ACCUSER DIES.
1. This Law is not Authentic.
2. The Emperor Antoninus to Eutychianus.
Even if Marcellus, who was accused of the crime of forgery, is dead, and for
this reason the crime is extinguished in his person, still the accusation is
not annulled, so far as you are concerned, as you state that his wife, as well
as yourself, has also been accused of complicity in the same offence.
Published on the seventh of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of
Lsetus, Consul for the second time, and Cerealis, 216.
3. The Same Emperor to Proculus.
If he whom you have accused of homicide, or of any other offence whatsoever, is
dead, proceedings instituted against you for having abandoned the accusation
will be without effect, as both the crime and the penalty are extinguished by
death; and, for the same reason, the necessity of proceeding with the
accusation is no longer imposed upon you.
Published at Rome, on the fourth of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate
of Sabinus and Anulinus.
4. The Emperor Alexander to Veronitianus.
If, as you allege, you are interested in a case involving the payment of money,
although Annianus, whom your agent accused of forgery, is dead, you will not be
prevented from bringing an accusation, if anyone should avail himself of the
instrument, which is of doubtful validity, against you; for although the
offence has been extinguished by the death of the principal, and can no longer
exist, still, if anyone wishes to make use of the forged instrument, he must
understand that he is liable to punishment for doing so.
Published on the sixth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of
Albinus and ^milianus, 228.
5. The Emperor Gordian to Rufus.
It is a well-known rule of law that, where persons accused of the commission of
public crimes, whether they themselves have perpetrated them or have ordered
others to do so, die while the accusation is pending, their heirs will not be
excluded from their estates, unless they have committed suicide.
Published on the seventh of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of
Pius and Pontianus, 239.
6. The Same Emperor to Julianus.
If anyone condemned to death or deportation should take an appeal, and die
before it has been determined, the crime is extinguished by his death. The same
rule shall be observed if the accuser should die while the appeal is pending.
If, however, the culprit should be sentenced to the penalty of relegation, and
to the loss of a part of his property, and should have recourse to appeal, the
appeal must, nevertheless, be heard and decided even after his death; as it is
proper to ascertain whether the confiscation of his property was valid or not.
Published on the sixth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Gordian
and Aviola, 240.

* TITLE VII. WHERE ANYONE REVILES THE EMPEROR.
1. The Emperors Theodosius, Arcadius, and Honorius to Rufinus, Prsetorian
Prefect.
Where anyone, ignorant of modesty and without any sense of shame, thinks Our
name should be attacked with dishonorable and petulant abuse, or if rendered
turbulent by drunkenness, he should manifest discontent with the proceedings of
Our reign, We are unwilling for him to be subjected to any penalty, nor do We
desire that he be treated with severity or harshness; since if this was the
result of levity, he is only worthy of contempt; if it was caused by insanity,
he is an object of pity; and if it was done for the purpose of injury, he
should be pardoned.
Wherefore, let any occurrence of this kind be, without reservation, brought to
Our knowledge, in order that We may consider what has been said, and determine
whether it should be passed over in silence, or investigated.
Given at Constantinople, on the sixth of the Idesof August, during the
Consulate of Theodosius, Consul for the third time, and Abun-dantius, 392.

* TITLE VIII.
ON THE LEX JULIA RELATING TO TREASON. 1. The Emperor Alexander to Paulinus.
You are not only not permitted to accuse a judge of the crime of treason,
because you allege that he has rendered a decision against
Our Constitution, but I do not wish accusations of this crime to be made during
My reign on any other grounds whatever.
Published on the third of the Idesof April, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Julianus, 224.
2. The Same Emperor to Faustinianus.
You entertain a singular idea of My disposition when, having in a moment of
anger and without reflection sworn by the name of the Emperor that you would
always treat your slave with severity, you think that you will be guilty of
treason if you do not continue to do so:
Published on the third of the Nonesof February, during the Consulate of Julian,
Consul for the second time, and Crispinus, 225.
3. The Emperor Constantine to Maximus, Prefect of the City.
If one person should accuse another of the crime of treason, he who is accused,
no matter what his rank or privileges may be, cannot protect himself from
torture, and whoever brings the accusation is hereby notified that he also
shall be put to the question (if he should be unable to prove his charge by
convincing evidence) along with the person accused of a crime of this kind. He
also, by whose advice and instigation the accusation appears to have been made,
must be subjected to torture, in order that punishment may be inflicted upon
all persons guilty of complicity in the offence.
Published on the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of Volusianus and
Annianus, 314.
4. The Emperors Valentinian, Valens, and Gratian to Olybrius, Prefect of the
City.
No one, under any circumstances, shall be forbidden to make use of any defence,
either that of military service, or of any order to which he may belong, or of
his family, to escape torture, without our knowledge and consent, where such
defence is proper, except solely in cases of treason, in which the condition of
all persons is considered to be equal.1
Given on the eighth of July, during the Consulate of the Noble Prince
Valentinian and Victor, 369.
5. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Eutychianus, Prsetorian Prefect.
Anyone who joins an infamous faction composed of either soldiers, private
persons, or barbarians, whether he himself, as its head, receives the oath, or
takes it as an individual, shall be put to death as
1 Among nations who recognized the Lex Talionis,homicide of the sovereign did
not constitute treason, as we understand it, for the offence was a private one
to be atoned for by blood-revenge, or by the payment of a fixed pecuniary fine
in lieu thereof. This was the rule among the early Anglo-Saxons. "Even in the
case of the murder of the king, the State did not take up the matter, but left
it to the royal kindred to obtain redress by private feud, as in other cases.
There could be no such thing as crime under these conditions, as in no case did
the State act to
guilty of high treason, and all his property shall be confiscated to Our
Treasury, whether he has plotted the death of illustrious men who are members
of Our Council and Consistory, and of the Senate (as they form part of Our
government), or finally, of anyone else who is in Our service; for the laws
punish with equal severity the intention to commit a crime and its actual
perpetration.
(1) The sons of a person convicted of such an offense, to whom by special
Imperial indulgence We grant the privilege of life (for they should be put to
death by the same punishment as their father, as in their cases his example,
that is the inclination to commit a crime, is inherited) shall be excluded from
the estates and successions of their mothers and grandmothers, and all their
remaining nearest relatives.
Nor shall they be able to receive anything under the wills of strangers, but
shall always remain in want, and poor; and the infamy of their fathers will
always attach to them, nor shall they afterwards be eligible to any office, or
be qualified to perform public duties; in short, such men shall remain in such
a condition of perpetual indigence that death will be a consolation to them,
and life a punishment.
(2) Finally, We order that those persons who attempt to intercede with Us for
criminals of this kind shall not be pardoned, no matter what their rank may be.
(3) Again, We decree that the children of such persons, whatever may be their
number, shall only be entitled to the Falcidian portion out of the estate of
their mother, whether she left a will or died intestate ; so that the daughters
may only have a moderate sum for their support, rather than the entire benefit
and name of heirs. The rule, when applicable to them, should be enforced with
moderation, as We think that they are less venturesome on account of the
weakness of their sex.
(4) Emancipations granted by the persons aforesaid, either in favor of their
sons or daughters, after the commission of the crime,
redress a wrong against itself." (Barrell, An Outline of Anglo-Saxon Law, Page
52.)
The Welsh did not permit the payment of money by way of compromise under such
circumstances. "There are three persons who forfeit their lives, and who cannot
be bought off: a traitor to the country and the tribe; he that kills another
from real malice; and a convicted thief for the value of more than four-pence."
(The Ancient Laws of Cambria, Triads of Dyvenwal Moelmud, Page 57.)
The disabilities resulting from the commission of treason are set forth as
follows in the old English law:
"In treason, there ensueth a corruption of blood in the line ascending and
descending.
"In treason, lands and goods are forfeited, and inheritances, as well intailed
asfee-simple, and the profits of estates for life.
"In treason there be no accessaries, but all are principals.
"In treason, no benefit of clergy, or sanctuary, or peremptory challenge.
"In treason, if the party stand mute, yet nevertheless judgment and attainder
shall proceed all one as upon verdict.
"In treason, bail is not permitted.
"In treason, no counsel is to be allowed to the party.
"In treason, no witness shall be received upon oath for the party's
justification." (Bacon, Works, A Preparation for the Union of Laws, Page
292.)—ED.
are not valid. We also decree that all dowries, donations, and, finally, all
alienations of any kind of property whatsoever, which it is established were
made after the time when the person implicated decided to join the faction and
association aforesaid, whether they were fraudulently or legally effected,
shall be of no force or effect.
(5) The wives of the above-mentioned criminals shall recover their dowries, if
any property received from their husbands by way of donation was given on
condition that it should be reserved for their children; and they are notified
that all of said property to which the sons may be entitled by law must be left
to Our Treasury, and that the Falcidian portion of the same shall be considered
to have been only reserved for the daughters, and not for the sons.
(6) We direct that what We have provided with reference to the aforesaid
offenders and their children shall also apply to their followers, associates,
and attendants; and We decree that their sons and their abettors shall be
treated with the same severity.
(7) If any one of these persons, at the very beginning of the organization of
the faction, being animated by a praiseworthy intention, should betray the
conspiracy, he shall be honored and rewarded by Us. He, however, who becomes
implicated, and afterwards reveals the secrets of the conspirators, unknown up
to that time, shall be considered worthy of absolution and pardon.
Given on the day before the Nonesof September, during the Consulate of
Csesarius and Atticus, 397.
6. This Law is not Authentic.
7. Paulus, On Public Crimes.
It should be remembered that, where any act is alleged to have been committed
against the majesty of the Emperor, it is customary for the crime to be
prosecuted even after the death of the culprit, since the Divine Marcus ordered
the property of the Senator Druncianus, who was the accomplice of Cassianus in
his conspiracy, to be confiscated to the Treasury after his death; and, during
Our reign, many heirs have been deprived of their right to estates under
similar circumstances.
(1) Moreover, in a crime of this kind, involving the majesty of the Emperor,
slaves are tortured to obtain evidence against their masters.
8. Martianus on Criminal Prosecutions, Book I, Title: "On the Lex Julia,
Relating to the Offence of High Treason."
After the enactment of the Constitution of the Divine Marcus, We have adopted
the rule that the accusation of this crime can be made even after the decease
of the culprits, so that, if the offender should be convicted after his death,
his memory may be condemned to infamy, and his heir deprived of his estate; for
in this way a person who has conceived such a wicked design is considered to
have been punished from that very moment.1 Thus the Divine Severus and
Antoninus
1 The general rule of the Civil Law, however, expressly stated that the mere
planning of an illegal act did not involve liability to criminal prosecution.
This
decided that, from the instant when a man became guilty of an offence of this
kind, he could neither alienate property nor manumit anyone, and that no one
could legally pay him a debt. The Great Antoninus stated the same thing in a
rescript. Under such circumstances, that is to say, where treason is involved,
slaves are put to the question to obtain evidence against their masters.
If the person implicated should die before his case has been decided, his
property must be deposited under seal, on account of the uncertainty of his
successor; as the Emperors Severus and Antoninus stated in rescripts addressed
to the Receivers of the Treasury.
Given on the third of the Nonesof March, . . .


* TITLE IX.
ON THE LEX JULIA RELATING TO ADULTERY AND FORNICATION.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Cassia.
The Lex Juliadeclares that wives have no right to bring criminal accusations
for adultery against their husbands, even though they may desire to complain of
the violation of the marriage vow, for while the law grants this privilege to
men it does not concede it to women.
Published on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of
Lateranus and Rufinus, 198.
2. The Same Emperors to Cyrus.
Those are guilty of the crime of pimping who allow their wives taken in
adultery to remain in marriage, and not those who merely suspect their wives of
having committed adultery.
Published on the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Anulinus and Fronto,
200.
3. The Emperor Antoninus to Julianus.
Not only the words of the Lex Juliaconcerning the repression of adultery, but
also the spirit of the law, authorize a husband who desires to prove that his
wife has been guilty of adultery to do so by torturing slaves of both sexes;
and this applies only to the slaves of the persons specially mentioned in the
law, that is to say, the woman, and her natural, not her adoptive father; and
it forbids the said slaves to be either manumitted or sold within the term of
sixty days, to be computed from the date of the dissolution of the marriage,
and requires the husband to furnish a bond to the owners of said slaves to
indemnify them, if the former should die under torture, or become deteriorated
in value, and the woman be acquitted.
was not the case with the early Scotch Code, Regiam Majestatem,said to have
been practically copied from Glanvil's treatise, and which declared that the
more serious offences, such as treason, homicide, arson, robbery, rape, and
forgery, "may be punished not only for any fact or deed, but also for the
intent and purpose." (Regiam Majestatem,I, I.)—ED.
Published on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of
Antoninus, Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
4. The Emperor Alexander to Julian, Proconsul of the Province of Narbonne.
If Numerius, who killed Gracchus at night in the act of adultery, did so under
such circumstances that he could have taken his life with impunity by virtue of
the Lex Julia,what was lawfully done will incur no penalty.
The same rule applies to sons who have obeyed the orders of their father, in a
case of this kind. If, however, the husband, rendered insane by grief, killed
the adulterer without being legally authorized to do so, even though the
homicide may have been excusable, still, because it was committed at night, and
his just grief diminished the criminality of the act, he can be sent into
exile.
Without date or designation of Consulate.
5. The Same Emperor to Vadantus.
An adulterer cannot be accused after the lapse of five years from the time when
the offence is said to have been committed, and these must be reckoned
continuously, for the guilty party must not be deprived of the benefit of the
prescription allowed by the laws.
Published on the Idesof June, during the Consulate of Maximus, Consul for the
second time, and Julianus, 224.
6. The Same Emperor to Sebastian.
Sixty available days are granted by law to a husband desiring to bring an
accusation of adultery, during which he will be allowed to do so either against
the adulterer or adulteress. If this term should elapse, the husband can still
proceed under the law conceding this right to strangers. He who brings an
accusation of this kind should have no fear of the penalty for malicious
prosecution, for My Divine relatives, the Emperors, have permitted the torture
of slaves to establish proof of the crime in the same way as in the case of a
husband.
Published on the second of the Idesof August, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and ^lianus, 224.
7. The Same Emperor to Heruclanus.
The man who afterwards married her cannot be a lawful accuser, where an adult
virgin was violated before her marriage; and therefore he cannot prosecute the
crime as her husband, unless he was betrothed to the girl who was violated. If,
however, she herself, with the assistance of her curators by whom her affairs
were transacted, should prosecute for the injury committed upon her, the
Governor of the province will impose a severe sentence in accordance with what
is required by law for a crime of this kind, if its commission should be
established.
Published on the twelfth of the Kalendsof June, during the Consulate of
Maximus, Consul for the second time, and ^Elianus, 224.
8. The Same Emperor to Domnus.
The Lex Juliarelating to chastity forbids the two parties guilty of adultery,
that is to say, the man and the woman, to be prosecuted at the same time, and
in the same case, but they can both be prosecuted in succession.
Published on the Idesof June, during the Consulate of Julian, Consul for the
second time, and Crispinus, 225.
9. The Same Emperor to Proculus.
It is proper for the preservation of virtue during My reign that a woman
convicted under the Lex Juliaconcerning chastity should suffer the legal
penalty.
Moreover, anyone that knowingly marries, or takes back a woman convicted of
adultery, who has in some way evaded the penalty prescribed for her crime,
shall be punished by the same law as a procurer.
Published on the seventh of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of
Julian, Consul for the second time, and Crispinus, 225.
10. The Same Emperor to Demetrianus.
It is not lawful to condone the crime of adultery, and he who is guilty of
collusion is in the same position as one who refuses to reveal the truth.
Moreover, he who accepts a sum of money to desist from prosecution, in a case
where adultery has been discovered, is liable to the penalty imposed by the Lex
Julia.
Published on the fifth of the Nones ofMay, during the Consulate of Fuscus and
Dexter, 226.
11. The Same Emperor to Narvanus.
No one doubts that a husband cannot accuse his wife of adultery if he continues
to retain her in marriage.
Published on the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of Alexander, Consul
for the second time, and Marcellus, 227.
Extract from Novel 117, Chapter XVIII. Latin Text.
Under the new law, however, he can do so, and if the accusation is proved to be
true, he can then repudiate her, and he should file a written accusation
against her. If, however, the husband should not be able to establish the
accusation of adultery which he brought, he will be liable to the same
punishment which his wife would have undergone if the accusation had been
proved.
12. The Same Emperor to Bassus.
Although, as you allege, he who was convicted of the crime of adultery was not
restored to his civil rights; still, since your sister, with whom the adultery
was said to have been committed, was not accused, she could not have been
subjected to any penalty, or rendered infamous, especially as you state that
the accuser afterwards died.
Published on the Kalendsof June, during the Consulate of Sabinus, Consul for
the second time, and Venustus, 241. T*U
13. The Same Emperor to Sylvanus.
It is an established rule of law that, if the adulteress, after the accusation
has been brought against her, should leave the province, she can still be
prosecuted while absent.
Published on the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of Atticus and
Prsetextatus, 243.
14. The Emperor Gordian to Aquila.
If your wife should be guilty of adultery during marriage, you ought to
prosecute her in the ordinary manner, in the province in which the adultery was
committed. If she committed adultery and married again after you repudiated
her, you cannot accuse her, unless the notice of the accusation preceded her
second marriage.
Published on the Nonesof December, during the Consulate of Gordian and Aviola,
240.
15. The Same Emperor to the Soldier Hilarinus.
If your former wife, before having been accused of adultery, left the province,
she cannot be accused while absent; nor can the complaint be legally made or
filed in the province in which you were serving as a soldier. Although you will
not be permitted to do this while you are in the military service, you can
accuse her afterwards, by observing the usual formalities; for the time during
which you were performing your duties as a soldier should not deprive you of
the vengeance which you demand for the suffering inflicted upon you as a
husband.
Published on the fourth of the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Atticus
and Praitextatus, 243.
Extract from Novel 134, Chapter V. Latin Text.
If the person guilty of adultery should conceal himself, or should leave the
province in which the crime was committed, We order that he shall be summoned
by the judge as legally required; and if he does not appear, the proceedings
prescribed by Our laws shall be instituted against him. When, however, it is
ascertained that he is living in another province, We order the judge of the
province in which the crime was committed to send a public letter to the judge
of the one in which the delinquent resides. He who receives the said public
letter shall arrest the culprit, and send him to the judge of the province in
which he perpetrated the offence, to undergo the penalty provided by law, or
run the risk of losing his office.
If, however, he who received the public letter aforesaid should neglect to do
this, or his subordinate officer should fail to discharge the duties imposed
upon him, We decree that the judge himself shall be fined three pounds of gold,
and his subordinate an equal sum. But when the judge, or any of his
subordinates, in consideration of money paid, do not arrest the offender, or
if, having arrested him, do not bring him into the other province, he who is
convicted of having done this shall be deprived of. his office and sent into
exile.
16. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to Archesilaus.
You should appear before the Governor in whose tribunal you have filed your
accusation of adultery, if you desire it to be dismissed; but you are mistaken
if you think that this can be done without making application to the court, and
that, afterwards, you will not be liable to the penalty prescribed by the
Decree of the Senate, for the Emperors have frequently decided the contrary.
And you are also notified that, hereafter, you will not have the power to make
accusations of this kind; because, by a Decree of the Senate and the Lex
Petronia,he who has filed an accusation for adultery and did not prosecute it
shall never again be permitted to bring one for this offence.
Published on the fifth of the Kalendsof June, during the Consulate of Maximus
and Glabrio, 257.
17. The Same Emperors to Victorinus.
You can resume marital relations with your wife without fear of being liable to
the penalty prescribed by the Lex Julia,for the suppression of adultery, as you
did nothing more than file the written accusation, for the reason that you
assert that you afterwards ascertained that you were impelled by groundless
indignation to accuse her; for he alone will be liable to the penalty
specifically mentioned by the law who is aware that his wife has been publicly
convicted of adultery, or that she is an adulteress, as he cannot simulate
ignorance of the fact, and retain her as his wife.
Published on the sixth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of the
Emperor Valerian, Consul for the fourth time, and Gallienus, Consul for the
third time, 258.
18. The Same Emperors and the Csesar Valerian to Theodora.
There is no doubt that he who has two wives at once is branded with infamy,
for, in a case of this kind, not the operation of the law by which Our citizens
are forbidden to contract more than one marriage at a time, but the intention,
should be considered; and therefore he who pretended to be unmarried, but had
another wife in the province, and asked you to marry him, can lawfully be
accused of the crime of fornication, for which you are not liable, for the
reason that you thought that you were his wife. You can obtain from the
Governor of the province the return of all your property of which you deplore
the loss on account of the fraudulent marriage, and which should be restored to
you without delay. But how can you recover what he promised to give you as his
betrothed ?
Adopted at Antioch, on the Idesof May, during the Consulate of Tuscus and
Bassus, 259.
19. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Pompeianus.
Although it is an undoubted rule of law that, whenever an accusation of
adultery is made, the presence of the accuser is required, still, as We have
learned from your letters that Materia, the wife of
Propositus, who was absent on a journey, was convicted of adultery with Julian
after her slaves had been put to torture; and that, when sentence was about to
be passed upon her, she demanded that her husband should be present, as the
case was almost terminated, and the crime in question had been proved, We do
not think that Propositus should be recalled from a distance.
Given on the Nonesof December, during the Consulate of the above-mentioned
Emperors.
20. The Same Emperors and Cassars to Didymus.
The laws punish the detestable wickedness of women who prostitute their
chastity to the lusts of others, but does not hold those liable who are
compelled to commit fornication through force, and against their will. And,
moreover, it has very properly been decided that their reputations are not
lost, and that their marriage with others should not be prohibited on this
account.
Published on the third of the Nonesof October, during the Consulate of
Diocletian, Consul for the fourth time, and Maximian, Consul for the third
time, 290.
21. The Same Emperors and Cassars to Silanus.
Although certain times have been prescribed by law with reference to the
commission of adultery, and the accusing of wives, which times must be properly
computed, still, if you were unable to file an accusation on account of your
having a public employment, and the prescribed term expired before you
relinquished your office, you have full power to bring the accusation after you
have done so. You should, however, not delay after you have vacated the office;
nor should you, for the purpose of terrifying your adversary, make a pretence
of bringing an accusation with unrestrained impetuosity.
Published on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of
Diocletian, Consul for the fourth time, and Maximian, Consul for the third
time, 290.
22. The Same Emperors and Cassars to Oblimosus.
If a woman whom you have carnally known indiscriminately sold herself for
money, and prostituted herself everywhere as a harlot, you did not commit the
crime of adultery with her.
Published on the twelfth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of
Diocletian, Consul for the fourth time, and Maximian, Consul for the third
time, 290.
23. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Proculus.
Slaves cannot accuse their wives of adultery for violation of conjugal faith.
(1) Again, where a man has legally married a wife after she has been divorced,
and, through fear of an accusation which had been filed, as well as of the
influence of the former husband, gave gold and silver to the accuser; he can
appear before the Governor, not only for
the purpose of recovering the property, but also to punish the base desire for
gain; and, after the allegations of the parties have been heard, and the truth
of the matter inquired into, if he should ascertain that anything had been
given by the innocent party on account of the fear of prosecution for crime, he
must render his decision accordingly, and in compliance with what has been
provided by law.
When, however, it is established that the money was paid as a consideration for
dishonorable marriage, and for the purpose of obtaining immunity, he will order
that the person who received the money in violation of the Decree of the
Senate, in such a detestable transaction, shall be punished.
Published on the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of Diocletian, Consul
for the fourth time, and Maximian, Consul for the third time, 290.
24. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Dionysii.
If you should be accused of adultery by her with whom you have lived in
violation of law, you can defend yourself by an innumerable number of
expedients.
25. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Sossianus.
Although it is established by the contents of certain documents that you are
consumed with the lust of immoderate desire, still, as it has been ascertained
that you confined yourself to female slaves, and did not have intercourse with
free women, it is clear that by a sentence of this kind your reputation
suffers, rather than that you become infamous.
Published on the fifth of the Idesof March, during the Consulship of Tiberianus
and Dio, 291.
26. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Crispinus.
As Alexander, who was accused of the crime of adultery, pleaded an exception on
the ground that the accuser, after the adultery was discovered, kept his wife
with him, We think that his status should now be investigated, and the order of
the proceeding be reversed, so that, in the first place, inquiry should be made
as to the civil condition of Alexander; and if, after having heard the case,
you should ascertain that he is free, you can authorize him to plead the
exception.
If, however, you should find that he is a slave, all the impediments caused by
the exception having been removed, you must immediately punish the accusation
of adultery, and if you find him guilty, impose the penalty which the laws have
prescribed for the offence.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors.
27. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Phoebus.
Adultery committed with a man whom a woman afterwards married is not
extinguished by the fact of the marriage.
Published on the eighteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of
the Caesars.
28. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Concordius, Proconsul of ffumidia.
Our respect for chastity is such that We have determined to remove the
ambiguities of former laws, and decide with reference to the trial for
adultery; all exceptions having been abolished, except that based on
prescription of five years; the one relative to pimping, which can be pleaded
against the husband; and that of which the woman can avail herself after the
former marriage has been dissolved, and before notice has been served upon her
not to contract a second one, namely, that her accomplice in the crime be
prosecuted; for it is unworthy that legal technicalities should prevent the
punishment of violated chastity.
Published on the Kalendsof June, during the Consulate of Tuscus and Anulinus,
295.
29. The Emperor Constantine to Africanus.
It should be ascertained whether the woman who committed adultery was the owner
of the inn, or only a servant; and if, by employing herself in servile duties
(which frequently happens), she gave occasion for intemperance, since if she
were the mistress of the inn, she will not be exempt from liability under the
law.
Where, however, she served liquor to the men who were drinking, she would not
be liable to accusation as having committed the offence, on account of her
inferior rank, and any freemen who have been accused shall be discharged, as
the same degree of modesty is required of these women as of those who are
legally married, and bear the name of mothers of families.
Those, also, are not subject to judicial severity who are guilty of fornication
or adultery, and the vileness of whose lives does not render them worthy of the
attention of the laws.
Signed and given at Heraclia, on the third of the Nonesof February, during the
Consulate of Constantine, Consul for the seventh time, and the Caesar
Constantius, 326.
30. The Same Emperor to Evagrius.
Although the crime of adultery is included among public offences, the
accusation of which is granted to all persons without distinction, still, in
order that those who inconsiderately wish to cause discord in households may
not be allowed to do so, it is hereby decreed that only the nearest relatives
of the guilty party shall have the power to bring the accusation; that is to
say, the father, the brother, and the paternal and maternal uncles, whom
genuine grief may impel to prosecute. We, however, also give the said persons
permission to revoke the accusation, by withdrawing it, if they should so
desire.
The husband, above all others, should be considered the avenger of the marriage
bed, for he is permitted to accuse his wife on suspicion, and he is not
forbidden to retain her, if he only suspects her; nor will he be liable if he
files a written accusation when he accuses her as her husband, a privilege
which was established by former Emperors.
Moreover, We decree that strangers shall be prevented from bringing such
charges, for although every kind of accusation renders the person who makes it
in writing liable in case it should not be proved, still, some persons boldly
make them and disturb marriages with false denunciations.
Those who have violated the sanctity of marriage should be punished with death.
Published at Nicomedia, on the seventh of the Kalendsof May, during the
Consujate of Constantine, Consul for the seventh time, and the Caesar
Constantius, Consul for the fourth time, 326.
Extract from Novel 134, Chapter X. Latin Text.
At present, however, a woman convicted of adultery is placed in a monastery,
from which her husband is permitted to remove her within the term of two years.
After the two years have expired, without her husband having taken her back,
or, before that, if he should have died, the adulteress, having had her head
shaved, and assumed a religious habit, shall remain there during lifetime, and
her property, if she has any, shall be divided into three parts, two of which
should be given to her children, and the third to the monastery. When she has
no children, and her parents are living and did not consent to her crime, they
shall receive a third part of her property, and the monastery two-thirds of the
same. If her aforesaid relatives are not living, all of her property shall be
acquired by her monastery, and, in every instance, all rights under dotal
agreements are reserved for the benefit of the husband.
Extract from Novel 117, Chapter XV. Latin Text.
If anyone should notify a man, whom he suspects of being intimate with his
wife, three times in writing, in the presence of three witnesses who are worthy
of confidence, to discontinue his relations with her, and afterwards should
surprise him with his wife, either in his own house, or in hers, or in that of
the adulterer, or in a tavern, or in a garden, he can kill her without any risk
to himself. If he should find him anywhere else, he must bring him with three
witnesses before the judge who will have a right to punish him without any
further proceedings.
If, however, after having been notified three times, as above stated, the
parties should be found talking together in a church, the husband can deliver
both to the defender of the church, or to any other members of the clergy, with
the understanding that they must be individually responsible for their custody
until the judge having jurisdiction shall order the bishop of the diocese to
produce the said persons before him, so that they may be put to torture, and
notice be given by him to the Governor of the province, who will impose the
penalty prescribed by law.
31. The Emperors Constantine and Constans to the People.When a man marries, and
his wife becomes pregnant, what can be desired of the woman when her sex is
lost sight of; when what it is of
no advantage to know becomes a crime; when the sexual act assumes another form;
when love is sought, but does not appear? We order the laws to rise up, and
justice to be armed with the avenging sword, that the severest penalty may be
visited upon those who are now, or shall hereafter, be guilty of this infamous
offence.
Given at Milan, on the day before the Nonesof December, and published at Rome
on the seventeenth of the Kalends ofJanuary, during the Consulate of
Constantine, Consul for the ninth time, and Constans.
32. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius to Cynegius,
Prsetorian Prefect.
In an investigation of adultery, inquiry must be made without excepting any of
all the slaves belonging, not only to the husband, but also to the wife, who
are alleged to have been in the house at the time when the adultery was
committed.
Given at Constantinople, on the third of the Idesof December, during the
Consulate of Arcadius and Bauto, 385.
33. The Emperors Theodosius, Arcadius, and Honorius to Rufinus, Prsetorian
Prefect.
When a charge of adultery has been made, We order that all civil exceptions by
means of which a dowry may be claimed, or any other debt demanded, and which
are ordinarily pleaded and examined, to be set aside, and that the progress of
the case shall not be delayed through their interposition. But when the
accusation has been formulated, that is to say, when it has been regularly
instituted, whether it was filed under the right of a husband, or under that of
a stranger, the crime shall be investigated, the evidence produced, the more
important matters in dispute settled, and all civil actions be subordinated to
the criminal prosecution. The woman will afterwards have the right to begin any
civil proceedings to which he is entitled, provided they do not interfere with
the conduct of the criminal case.
Given at Constantinople, on the seventh of the Idesof December, during the
Consulate of Arcadius, Consul for the second time, and Rufinus, 392.
34. The Same Emperors to Rufinus, Prsetorian Prefect.
Where persons accused of adultery repel the accusation under the pretext of
relationship, stating that, for this reason, allegations relating to commission
of the crime ought not to be believed, or that it was impossible that it should
have been committed, and they are afterwards married, the offence of which they
were accused shall, merely by this fact, be considered to have been proved
clearly and by legal evidence. Therefore, if any such persons should be met
with, We order that they shall be severely punished, just as if they had been
convicted of the crime, and had confessed it.
Given at Constantinople, on the day before the Nonesof December, during the
Consulate of Theodosius, Consul for the third time, and Abundantius, 393.
35. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Palladius, Praetorian Prefect.
If a woman should repudiate her husband without any legal reason having been
assigned by her for so doing, We grant the repudiated husband permission to
accuse her, if she should stain her widowhood with acts of debauchery.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Eustachius
and Agricola, 421.
36. The Emperor Justinian to John, Praztorian Prefect.
Former legislators have directed that the freedom of slaves, who belong either
to the wife, the husband, or their parents, in case of the repudiation of
either of the parties on account of suspicion of the crime of adultery, shall
remain in suspense for the term of two months, which must be reckoned from the
date of the repudiation, on account of the torture to be inflicted upon them in
case it should be deemed necessary. But, as your wife died after your marriage
was dissolved in the above-mentioned manner, nothing further is stated by the
authorities concerning any additional time during which the slaves shall be
required to remain in their present condition for the reason above mentioned.
It, however, seems to Us to be necessary to fix a certain period in a case of
this kind, with a view to determining the question of dowry, and whether it
should belong to the husband, or be transferred to the heirs of the wife. Hence
We order that, after the death of the wife, another two months shall be added,
so that the above-mentioned slaves may remain together, and the husband have
the power to prove the adultery by them. When the above-mentioned time has
elapsed, the heir of the woman will have permission to grant freedom to the
slaves, unless he was to blame for the husband being prevented from bringing
the accusation of adultery during the term prescribed by law.
Given at Constantinople, on the fifth of the Kalendsof November, after the
Consulate of Lampadius and Orestes, 532.
37. This Law is not Authentic.

* TITLE X. WHERE A GUARDIAN CORRUPTS His FEMALE WARD.
1. The Emperor Constantine to Bassus, Vicegerent of Italy.
When a guardian violates the chastity of his female ward, he shall be sentenced
to deportation, and all his property shall be confiscated to the Treasury,
although he must still suffer the penalty which the laws inflict upon
ravishers.
Given at Aquileia, on the day before the Nonesof April, during the Consulate of
Constantine, Consul for the seventh time, and Con-stantius, 326.

* TITLE XL
CONCERNING WOMEN WHO COPULATE WITH THEIR OWN SLAVES.
1. The Emperor Constantine to the People.
When a woman is convicted of having secretly had sexual intercourse with her
slave, she shall be sentenced to death, and the rascally slave shall perish by
fire. Every facility for the proof of this crime shall be afforded all persons,
any official can bring the charge, and even the slave-himself shall be
permitted to testify concerning it, and if it should be established, he must be
granted his freedom. Children born of such an union shall be deprived of all
insignia of rank, and shall have nothing but their freedom, nor will they be
entitled to receive anything from the estates of their mothers, as bequests
under her will, either directly or through the intervention of others.
Moreover, the intestate succession of the woman will pass to her legitimate
children, or to her nearest relatives, or to those who are designated by law.
All the property which the slave who was convicted may have been entitled to,
and anything which could, under any circumstances, have been obtained by the
children of this union, as belonging to the woman, can be claimed by the heirs
above mentioned.
Given on the fourth of the Kalendsof June, during the Consulate of Constantine,
Consul for the seventh time, and the Caesar Constan-tius, 326.

* TITLE XII.
ON THE LEX JULIA RELATING TO PUBLIC OR PRIVATE VIOLENCE.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Pelitia.
Those who seize the property of a wife on account of a debt of her husband, or
because of some public civil liability which he has incurred, are considered to
have been guilty of violence.
Given at Rome, on the Kalendsof July, during the Second Consulate of Antoninus
and Geta, 206.
2. The Emperor Antoninus to Verus.
If the third part of the property of your guardian, who was convicted under the
Lex Juliarelating to private violence, has been confiscated to the Treasury,
bring an action of guardianship to recover the portion which your guardian
obtained from the Treasury, provided no prescription can be pleaded against
you, for each heir of the estate is liable for his proportionate share.
Published on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of
Antoninus, Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Bianorus.
If, as you allege, your son's betrothed has been taken away from him, or your
son has been shut up, you will not be prevented from bringing an accusation of
violence before the Governor of the province under the provisions of the Lex
Jidia.
Published at Verona, on the eighth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulship
of the above-mentioned Emperors.
4. The Same Emperors and Csssars to Liberating.
If you think that a criminal accusation should be brought on account of the
property carried away by a slave, you should not bring it against the master of
the slave, but against him who you allege committed the offence. But as you
state that you have also been beaten by the said slave Fiscinulus, you can
proceed against his master also (if you think that he should be prosecuted for
private violence under the Lex Julia)before the Governor, who will not be
ignorant in what way punishment should be inflicted, if the crime should be
proved.
5. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Oplo.
Even if a creditor should take possession of land by force, he can be accused
of private violence under the terms of the Lex Julia.
Ordered at Nicomedia, on the sixth of the Idesof December, during the Consulate
of the Csesars.
6. The Emperor Constantine to Catulinus, Proconsul of Africa.
As many crimes are classed under the term "violence," and as force is often
employed against those who resist, and blows are inflicted upon others who
indignantly return them, and murder not infrequently results, it has been
decided that if anyone, either on the side of the person in possession, or on
that of him who rashly attempts to obtain it, should be killed, he must be
punished who attempted to employ force, and was responsible for the injuries of
either party, and he shall not merely be sentenced to relegation, or
deportation to an island, but shall suffer death, and the judgment pronounced
against him shall not be suspended by appeal.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of
Gallicanus, and Bassus, 317.
7. The Same Emperor to Bassus, Prefect of the City.
When anyone asserts that a tract of land, or any other property, belongs to
him, and thinks that he is entitled to restitution of possession of the same,
or institutes civil proceedings to obtain it or brings an accusation of
violence, after having complied with the legal formalities, he is hereby
notified that if he cannot prove the commission of the crime, he shall suffer
the same penalty which the defendant would have undergone, if guilty. But if,
having failed to serve notice upon the party in possession, he should employ
force against him, We order that the case involving violence shall be heard
before any others, and whatever has happened to the party in possession should
be ascertained, so that the right to possession of the property which he lost
may be restored to him; and that, when this has been done, if a criminal
accusation should be brought, the penalty for violence shall not be inflicted,
but the decision of the entire case shall be postponed, so that the principal
matter may be disposed of; and if judgment should be rendered against him, he
shall be deported to an island, after the confiscation of all his property.
Published at Rome, on the day before the Nonesof October, during the Consulate
of Constantine, Consul for the fifth time, and the Caesar Licinius, 319.
8. The Emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius to Albinus, Prefect of
the City.
We decree that slaves who have been guilty of violence, whether this is proved
by the evidence of witnesses or by their own confessions, and if they have
committed the violence without the knowledge of their masters, shall suffer the
extreme penalty for the offence which they have perpetrated. If, however, they
committed it through fear, or by order of their masters, it is clear that,
according to the Lex Julia,the latter should be declared infamous, and be
deprived of any privileges they enjoy, either on account of their country, or
their birth; and the slaves who are proved to have obeyed such wicked commands
shall, after conviction, be sent to the mines. Vile and degraded persons, as
well as those who have frequently been convicted of having perpetrated acts of
violence, are liable to the same penalty under the Imperial constitutions.
The judge must remember that he will be branded with infamy if he should delay
to pass sentence for the crime of violence, after it has been established
before him; or should refuse to hear the accusation, or should grant immunity
to the offender; or should impose a milder penalty than We have prescribed.
Given at Milan, on the day before the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of
Valentinian, Consul for the fourth time, and Neoterius, 290.
9. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Aurelius, Prsetorian Prefect.
The crime of one who robs, and of one who knowingly retains the stolen
property, are not dissimilar.1
Given on the third of the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of Honorius,
Consul for the tenth time, and Theodosius, Consul for the fifth time, 415.
1The rapinaof the Roman jurisconsults, known to us as highway robbery, was
denned by them to be the open and forcible taking away of personal property
from another against his will, for the sake of gain. "Rei mobilis alienx
ablatio manifesto, et violenta invito domino lucro facienda gratia."The offence
is not included among those enumerated in the Laws of the Twelve Tables, hence,
as it must have existed in all a.ges, it has very plausibly been surmised that
it was orig-
10. The Emperors Leo and Anthemius to Nicostratits, Prsetorian Prefect.
We desire that all persons, both in the towns and in the country, shall be
deprived of permission to harbor thieves, vagabonds, and
inally called furtum manifestum,or manifest theft; especially as there is
nothing in the etymology of the term furtum,which is, in the slightest degree,
suggestive of the concealment which we are accustomed to associate with
larceny. It was specifically created a public offence by the Edict of the
Praetor, and was confined to movables, which alone would admit of
contractatio,or handling (obviously not applicable to real property), which was
declared essential to constitute the crime of furtum,whether manifest or non-
manifest. It differed from manifest theft solely in being accompanied with
violence, and the penalty was the same, namely, quadruple damages—including the
article stolen—to be collected by means of the Actio vi bonorum raptorum.The
practical identity of the offence with manifest theft is also indicated by the
fact that the penal action for the latter could also be brought at the option
of the injured person, a proceeding which was, in some respects, the preferable
one, inasmuch as the claim for damages did not, in this instance, include the
valuation of the property which was the basis of the suit.
The ancient Babylonians punished highway robbery with death, and, in case the
criminal escaped, the district in which it occurred was liable for damages. "If
a man practice brigandage and be captured that man shall be put to death."
"If the brigand be not captured, the man who has been robbed shall, in the
presence of God, make an itemized statement of his loss, and the city and the
governor, in whose province and jurisdiction the robbery was committed, shall
compensate him for whatever he lost." (The Code of Hammurabi 22, 23.)
It was also punished capitally by the Hindus. "Whoever robs on the Highway: The
Magistrate shall cause a Rope to be tied about his Neck, and shall thus deprive
him of life." (Gentoo Code XVII, 3.)
The laws of the Saxons required the return of the stolen goods and the payment
of a fine of sixty shillings. "If anyone within the limits of our realm commit
'reaf-lac' and 'nyd-naeme,' let him give up the 'reaf-lac' and pay LX shillings
as 'wite.'" (Ancient Laws and Institutes of England; The Laws of King Ine, 10.)
"If anyone commit 'reaf-lac' let him give it up, and compensate, and be liable
in his 'wer' to the king." (Ibid.,The Laws of King Canute, 64.)
The early English jurists, who treated robbery as a form of manifest theft,
derived the definition from the Civil Law. "Est etiam quasi furtum, rapina quse
idem est quantum ad nos quod roberia, & est aliud genus eontraotationis contra
voluntatem domini, & similis posna sequitur vtrumque delictum, et vnde prsedo
dieitur fur improbus; quis enim magis contractat rem aliquam inuito domino,
quam ille qui vi rapit?"(Bracton, De Legibus et Consuetudinitus AnglixIII,
150.)
Employment of violence was always indispensable, but taking from the person was
not, if the article was removed from the presence of the injured party against
his consent. Its value was not fixed, as in the case of grand larceny, at a
specified sum, and anything seized under such circumstances, no matter what it
may have been worth, comes within the law. "Robbery est, quant ascun home prent
ascu chose del parson du auter felonisement, in tiel cas coment que la chose
prise ne soit al value forsque dun denier; vncore ceo est felonye, pur quel il
serra pendus."
"Si vn prist ascun de mes chattels apertement deins tiel lieu ou leo suis
preset, & encounter mon gree, que ceo est robbery coment que il ne ceo prist de
man person."(Staundf orde, Les Plees del Cor onI, 10.)
The definition of robbery as given by the old jurisconsults is still accepted
in England. Originally capital, like all serious felonies, it is now punishable
by penal servitude for from five years to life. (VideStephen, A Digest of the
Criminal Law, Arts. 296, 313.)
When this offence is committed, or even an attempt was made to perpetrate it by
a number of armed persons, in China, the penalty is death.
The punishment of individual offenders is usually less severe. The magistrates,
however, are invested with discretionary power, and can inflict a capital
armed fugitive slaves. If anyone, in violation of this law which We have
promulgated for the public welfare, should attempt to entertain armed slaves,
vagabonds, or robbers on his premises, or near his person, We order that he
shall be punished severely, after having been sentenced to pay a fine of a
hundred pounds of gold.
The illustrious Governors of provinces should see that no one dares to violate
this law in any respect, and if they do so knowingly, they shall be stripped of
their rank and office, and, after having been condemned to pay a fine of a
hundred pounds of gold, shall be put to
sentence when there are aggravating circumstances attending the crime, and they
must do so if the victim is wounded. "All persons found guilty of taking
unlawful possession of the property of others, in open day and by forcible
means, shall, however small the amount of the property so taken, be punished
with 100 blows and banishment for three years." (The Penal Code of China, Secs.
CCLXVI, CCLXVIII.)
Japan punishes robbery with imprisonment for not less than three years in
ordinary cases, a term which may extend to five, or even ten years, where
justice seems to demand it. (Penal Code of Japan, Arts. 273, 277, 279.)
The penalties in Germany vary from imprisonment for six months, where
extenuating circumstances exist, to confinement at hard labor for life, where
the crime is of a peculiarly atrocious character. Burglary of an inhabited
building is classed under this head. (Strafgesetzbuch filr das Deutsche
Reich,Secs. 249, 250, 251.)
Austria prescribes imprisonment of from five to twelve years, dependent upon
the conditions under which the crime was perpetrated. The mere display of
violence, without taking the property, is sufficient to incur criminal
liability. (Allge-meines Strafgesetz,Arts. 190, 191, 192, 193.)
The desire of gain is a necessary element of the offence by Spanish law, and
the value of the property involved is an important consideration in passing
sentence. The number of malefactors and the fact that they are armed are
matters of aggravation, in fixing the penalty; which is imprisonment for from
two months and a day to confinement in chains for life. (Codigo Penal de
Espana,Arts. 515-529.)
In Prance, anyone guilty of robbery can be sentenced to hard labor for a term
of years, or for life. (Code Penal,Art. 382.)
Imprisonment for from three to ten years is the penalty prescribed by the
Italian Code. (Codice Penale del Regna d'ltalia,Art. 400.)
Numerous penalties for this offence exist in Portugal. They vary from
imprisonment for a few months to more than eight years, which, in aggravated
cases, may be followed by banishment for terms up to fifteen years. (Codigo
Penal Portuguez,Arts. 432-444.)
Nearly all the penal codes of continental Europe describe burglary as a species
of robbery by violence, for which, when committed in an inhabited house, very
severe punishment is imposed. When death or wounding result, the offence
becomes capital.
American law defines robbery to be "The felonious and forcible taking of the
property of another, from his person or in his presence, against his will by
violence or by putting him in fear. The property must be the subject of
larceny, whether common law or statutory." As in theft, the animus furandiis
necessary. Force, either actual or manifested by threats, being absolutely
requisite to constitute the offence, the value of the stolen property need not
be proved. (Wharton, Criminal Law, Arts. 1081, 1083.)
The penalty under the United States statutes is imprisonment for not more than
fifteen years. (Barnes, Federal Code, Sec. 9985.)
In the various commonwealths, the culprit is usually sentenced to a long term
of penal servitude; in some of the western states, however, train robbery is a
capital crime.—ED.
death, and their principal retainers, as well as the attendants attached to
their persons, shall also be condemned to death, in addition to the
confiscation of their property.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Anthemius, Consul for the second time, 468.


* TITLE XIII. CONCERNING THE RAPE OF VIRGINS, WIDOWS, AND NUNS.
1. The Emperor Justinian to Hermogenes, Master of the Offices.
We decree that ravishers of virgins, who are of honorable rank or freeborn,
whether they have been betrothed or not, or of widows of any description,
whether they are freedwomen or the slaves of others, shall be punished with
death, as being guilty of the worst of crimes; especially when they are widows
or virgins consecrated to God, for not only in this case is an injury committed
against humanity, but against the reverence due to Almighty God himself; since
the virginity or chastity which has been destroyed cannot be restored. It is
with reason that person of this kind are condemned to death as ravishers, as
they are frequently also guilty of homicide.
Therefore, in order that a crime of such atrocity may not go unpunished, We
decree by this general constitution that those who perpetrate it, as well as
those who aid them at the time, where they are caught in the act and surprised
when committing it, can immediately be killed by the fathers or the blood-
relatives, guardians, curators, patrons or masters of the said virgins, widows,
or women of any description whatsoever, whether they are freeborn or not.
We order that these provisions shall, above all, be applicable to those who
have dared to ravish married women, for the reason that they are liable to
punishment for a double crime, that is to say, for adultery as well as rape;
and it is necessary for the crime of adultery to be punished with greater
severity on account of the other offence being added to it. We class with these
criminals one who has ventured to ravish the girl who was betrothed to him.
If, however, after the commission of such a detestable crime, the ravisher
should be able to defend himself on account of his powerful influence, or to
escape by flight, the illustrious Praetorian Prefects, as well as the
distinguished Prefect of the City in this Imperial Capital, as well as the
eminent Praetorian Prefects in Illyria and Africa, the Generals of the Army,
throughout the different portions of Our Empire, the Eminent Prefect of Egypt,
the Count of the East, the Vicegerents, Proconsuls, Dukes, and Governors of
Provinces, and Judges of every rank, who may be in those places, shall display
the greatest zeal and exert every effort to apprehend the culprit, and shall
punish with exemplary severity those who have been arrested for the commission
of such a crime, and sentence them to death after evidence which is competent
and recognized by law has been given, without permitting any exception to be
pleaded. If the defendants should wish
to appeal, We, in accordance with the provisions of the ancient law of
Constantine, refuse to grant them permission to do so.
(1) When the females who have been violated are either slaves or freedwomen,
their ravishers shall only be subjected to the penalty aforesaid, and shall not
be deprived of any portion of their property. If, however, such an atrocious
crime should be perpetrated against a woman who is freeborn, all the property
movable, immovable, or capable of moving itself, which belongs to the ravishers
themselves, or to their accomplices, associates, or followers who have given
them assistance, shall be transferred to the ownership of the said ravished
freeborn woman by a decree of court, and the efforts of her parents, husband,
guardians or curators.
When the woman above mentioned is not married, she can lawfully be united in
matrimony with any man whomsoever, except her ravisher, and the property of the
latter, or as much of it as she may desire, shall be given as the dowry of the
woman aforesaid. If she should not be willing to accept a husband, but prefers
to remain single, We order that the said property shall belong to her
absolutely, and that no judge, or any other person whosoever, shall dare to
violate this provision.
No virgin, widow, or any other woman shall be permitted to accept her ravisher
as her husband, but any person whom her parents may agree to (her ravishers
excepted) can legally marry her, as, under no circumstances, and at no time,
shall she be given permission by Us to consent to marry one who, in Our Empire,
may attempt to contract marriage in a hostile manner; for, where anyone desires
to take a wife, whether she be freeborn or a freedwoman, it is necessary to
demand her of her parents, or in accordance with Our laws and ancient customs,
of others who have charge of her, so that a lawful union may be effected with
their consent.
(2) The penalties which We have previously prescribed, that is to say, those of
death and the loss of property, We decree shall not only be inflicted upon the
ravishers themselves, but also upon those who accompanied them, and were
present when the crime took place. We subject to the punishment of death all
those who were aware of and accomplices in a crime of this kind, and have been
convicted; as well as those who harbored the culprits, or gave them any
assistance, whether they be men or women, no matter of what position, rank, or
dignity they may be; and We render them liable to this penalty, whether the
offence was perpetrated with or without the consent of the said virgins or
women.
If, however, the ravishers themselves refrained from the commission of this
crime, being deterred either by fear, or by the severity of the punishment, no
reproach can be brought against the woman, whether she gave her consent or not,
because this law has been enacted to protect women from the treachery of wicked
men, who intend to employ violence. For unless a man solicited her, and
deceived her by his detestable arts, he did not induce her to submit to such
dishonor; and if her parents, upon whom, above all, devolves the duty of
revenge,
should tolerate the crime, and stifle their grief, they shall be punished with
deportation.
(3) When anyone of a servile condition is convicted of complicity in a crime of
this description, We order him or her to be put to death by fire, without
distinction of sex, as this was also very properly provided for by the Law of
Constantine.
All the provisions of the Lex Julia,which have reference to the rape of
virgins, widows, or nuns, or which are contained in the ancient books of the
law, or in the Imperial Constitutions, are hereby abolished for the future, and
this law alone shall take the place of all others, so far as what We have
decreed concerning the rape of nuns, virgins, and widows is concerned.
Given at Constantinople, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof December, during the
Second Consulate of Our Lord the Emperor Justinian, 528.1
1 The term "rape," at Civil Law, had a much broader signification than it has
with us; as it included not only carnal knowledge of a woman by violence, but
also forcibly carrying her away with that intention, which was sufficient to
incur full criminal liability, even though copulation had not actually
occurred. The offence was defined, and its punishment fixed by the Lex Julia,
'de vi publica et privata,,in which are enumerated many other breaches of the
law, among them sedition, riot, appearing armed in public, arson, false
imprisonment, abuse of official power, collecting illegal taxes, and
interference with the administration of justice.
The laws of Babylon did not recognize rape as a crime except when committed
upon a woman who was betrothed.
"If a man force the (betrothed) wife of another who has not known a male and is
living in her father's house, and he lie in her bosom and they take him, that
man shall be put to death and that woman shall go free." (The Code of
Hammurabi, Sec. 130.)
Under the Salic Law, when three men violated an unmarried free woman, they each
became liable to a fine of thirty solidi.Nothing was provided concerning the
commission of the act by a smaller number, except where a freedman ravished the
manumitted female slave of another, he was fined twenty solidi.
"Si qui tres homines ingenuam puellam de casa aut de screuna rapuerint,
unusquisque eorum MCC din, qui fac. sol.XXX culp. iud."
"Si quis libertus libertam alienam rapuerit, DCCC din. qui fac. sol.XX culp.
iud." (Lex SalicaXIV, XCIII.)
The primary meaning of the verb rapere,to forcibly carry away, was adopted by
the Visigoths, who considered the crime to be consummated as soon as this took
place, carnal knowledge being merely an aggravation calling for an additional
penalty. The rape of a virgin or a widow was punished by the forfeiture of half
of the offender's property to the victim, and if sexual intercourse ensued, he
was deprived of all his possessions for her benefit, received two hundred
lashes in public, and was delivered up to the woman, or her parents, to serve
as a slave for life. (Forum JudicumIII, III, I.)
When the girl was betrothed, half of his property was given to her, and half to
her intended husband; if he had little or nothing, he was sold at auction, and
the proceeds equally divided between them. (Ibid.,Ill, III, V.)
Violation of a freeborn woman by slaves was punished by scalping, and the
infliction of three hundred lashes with a scourge. (Ibid.,Ill, III, Vill.)
The rape of a married woman was called adultery with violence, and the
perpetrator was given up to the vengeance of the husband. His property was also
transferred to the latter, provided he had no legitimate issue.
"Si quis uxori alienee, adulterium intulerit violenter, si ipse adulter filios
habens legititmos talia perpetraverit, ipse solus absque rebus addicatur marito
mulieris.

* TITLE XIV. CONCERNING THE CORRECTION OF SLAVES.
1. The Emperor Constantine to Bassus.
If a master should punish his slave by striking him with rods or straps, or, in
order to keep him in custody, should place him in chains,
Si autem filios legitimos non habuerit, quibus facultas sua deberi legitime
possit, cum omnibus rebus suis in potestate mariti mulieris deveniet, ut in
eius potestate vindicia consistat." (Ibid.,Ill, IV, I.)
Rape among the Hebrews was punished capitally when the girl was betrothed,
otherwise by the payment of a specified sum regarded as an indemnification for
the
injury.
"But if a man find a betrothed damsel in the field, and the man force her, and
lie with her, then the man only that lay with her shall die."
"If a man find a damsel that is a virgin, which is 'not betrothed, and lay hold
on her, and lie with her, and they be found;"
"Then the man that lay with her shall give unto the damsel's father fifty
shekels of silver, and she shall be his wife; because he hath humbled her, he
may not put her away all his days." (Deuteronomy XXII, 25, 28, 29.)
In ancient Greece, a man guilty of this offence was liable to a fine dependent
upon the civil condition of the victim.
"He that deflowers a free woman by force shall be fined an hundred drachms."
"He who in the same manner violates a young maiden's chastity shall be fined a
thousand drachms." (Potter, Antiquities of Greece I, XXVI, Page 203.)
The peculiar manner in which the accusation was filed and the complaint sworn
in Wales carry us back to the oath taken by Abraham's servant in Holy Writ.
"If a man commit a rape upon a woman and then deny it, let there be given the
oaths of fifty men, who are all Welshmen and common freeholders, to clear him.
If the woman also legally urge her complaint, having taken hold of the privy
member of the man with her left hand, and having her right hand upon the sacred
relic, let her swear that he by force defiled her with this member, and brought
insult and disgrace upon her, upon her tribe, and upon her lord. Some of the
judges will not admit of any denial against such an oath, but we have made
provision for a denial, as we have previously mentioned."
"If a man commit a rape upon a woman and acknowledge it, let him pay twelve
cows as a fine to the lord, and also her commutation fee to the lord. If she
were a maid, let him pay her the maiden fee and her dowry to the utmost amount
that he ought, as well as her satisfaction and her security; and if she be a
married woman, her satisfaction for the insult must be increased one half."
(Ancient Laws of Cambria; Laws of Howel the Good, 135, 136.)
The Saxons, like the majority of barbarians, permitted pecuniary compensation
or "bot" to be made for the commission of this offence; the amount being
regulated according to the "wer," that is, the estimated value of the guilty
party, which was determined by his rank and social position.
"If a man carry off a maiden by force, let him pay L. shillings to the owner,
and1 afterwards buy (the object of) his will of the owner."
"If she be betrothed to another man in money, let him make 'bot' with XX
shillings." (Ancient Laws and Institutes of England; The Laws of King ^thel-
bert, 82, 83.)
"If anyone ravish a widow, let him make 'bot' for it with his 'wer.' If anyone
ravish a maid, let him make 'bot' for it with his 'wer.'" (The Laws of King
Canute, 53.)
The Normans prescribed castration as the penalty.
"Si quis mulierem vi oppresserit et violaverit, membrorum dampno punietur."
(Ibid.,The Laws of King William the Conqueror XVIII.)
This was based upon the Lex Talionis,and, serious enough in itself, the
punishment was subsequently increased by the infliction of blindness, which was
in-
no objection can be raised with reference to the time he was confined, and the
master need have no fear of criminal prosecution, in case the slave should die.
For, indeed, he does not use his rights without moderation in a case of this
kind, but he will become guilty of homicide if he should intentionally inflict
a fatal wound upon the slave by means of rods, stones, or weapons; or order him
to be hung; or direct him to
eurred by the violation of a respectable matron, widow, or nun. Acknowledged
concubines were also embraced in this category. "Quod guide crimen si
couincatur, sequitur poena s. amissio mebroru, vt sit mebru p membra, quid
virgo cum cor-rupitur, mebru amittit, & idea corruptor puniatur in eo in quo
deliquit, oculos igitur amittat opter aspectu decoris, quo virgine cocupiuit,
amittat & testiculos, qui calore stupri induxerut. No autem sequitur huiusmodi
posna de qualibet fce-mina, licet vi opprimatur. 'Sequitur to/men alia grauis &
grauior, secundum qd' fuerit nupta, vel vidua honeste viuens, sanctimonialis,
vel alia matrona. lie con-cubina legittima, vel alia quasstu faciens sine
delectu quide personara."(Bracton, De Legibus et Consuetudinibus Anglix,III,
147.)
Although rape was already a crime at Common Law, the Stat. Westminster, 2, 34,
13, Edw. I, provided: "If a Man ravish a Woman married, Maid, or other, where
she did not consent, neither before nor after, he shall have Judgment of Life
and Member." (Wingate, Abridgment of All the Statutes, Page 516.) Until the
reign of Richard II, the woman could release her ravisher from the penalty by
marrying him, a privilege absolutely forbidden by Roman law. The crime could
not subsequently be pardoned, and if it was, neither party was allowed to
inherit, and the victim, if married, forfeited her dower.
The early English authorities differed as to whether rape could be committed on
a child under ten years of age, hence the Stat. 18: Eliz., Cap. 7, was enacted
to remove this doubt. This opinion was based rather upon want of physical
development than upon presumed mental incapacity to acquiesce.
Modern legislation, designed for the protection of immature girls, and which
establishes the age when a female can legally consent to the performance of the
sexual act, is inherited from Roman jurisprudence. Stuprum,or fornication,
committed on a female child less than twelve years old, was punished by
sentence to the mines, or to exile, dependent upon the rank of the offender.
(Digest, XLVIII, XIX, 38, 3.) Many nations, among them Scotland, Italy, Spain,
Holland, and Japan, following the generally recognized rule concerning puberty
adopted by Rome, have fixed the age of consent at twelve; Austria and Belgium
at fourteen; France and Sweden at fifteen; and Denmark at sixteen years.
England makes the offence a felony when the victim is under thirteen, and a
misdemeanor when she is over thirteen, and under sixteen. In this country the
age of consent varies from twelve to eighteen years.
Germany punishes rape with penal servitude for not more than ten years.
(Strafgetzbuch fur das Deutsche Reich,Art. 176.)
In Austria, the penalty is imprisonment for from five years to life, dependent
upon circumstances. (Allgemeines Strafgesetz,Arts. 125, 126, 127.)
By the Penal Code of the Russian Empire, it is not more than ten years at hard
labor. (Code Penal Russe,Art. 522.)
French law prescribes from five to twenty years. (Code Penal, Art. 332.)
In Spain rape is to a certain extent synonymous with abduction for immoral
purposes, the original meaning of the term being always taken into
consideration. (Codigo Penal,Art. 460.)
Italy fixes the penalty at from six months to five years. (Codice Penale del
Regna d'ltalia,Art. 340.)
Rape is a felony in every State of the Union, but there is a great difference
in the severity of the punishment imposed, which almost always consists of a
term of imprisonment. The popular belief in the inadequacy of the latter is
disclosed by the frequent burning of negroes in the South. It is a remarkable
fact that this is the same penalty established by the Third Section of the
preceding law, under which Roman slaves, guilty of rape, were condemned to
perish by fire.—ED.
be hurled from a precipice; or give him poison; or lacerate his body publicly
by the application of iron hooks to his sides; or burn his limbs with fire; or
cause his joints to waste away by depriving them of their humors and blood; or
deprive him of life by means of torture worthy of the cruelty of the most
savage barbarians.
Given at Rome, on the fifth of the Idesof May, during the Consulate of
Constantine, Consul for the fifth time, and Licinius, 312.

* TITLE XV. CONCERNING THE CORRECTION OF RELATIVES.
1. The Emperors Valentinian and Valens to the Senate.
We grant the power of punishing minors to their elder relatives, according to
the nature of the offence which they have committed, in order that the remedy
of such discipline may exert its influence over those whom a praiseworthy
example at home has not induced to lead an honorable life.
We, however, are not willing that the right to inflict extremely severe
castigation for the faults of minors should be conferred, but that the exercise
of paternal authority may correct the errors of youth, and repress them by
private chastisement. If, however, the enormity of the deed should exceed the
limits of domestic correction, We decree that those guilty of atrocious crime
shall be brought before the courts of justice.
Given on the day before the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Valentinian and Valens, 365.

* TITLE XVI. ON THE LEX CORNELIA RELATING TO ASSASSINS.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to HercuLianus and Other Soldiers.
Your brother would have done better if he had surrendered himself to the
Governor of the province, for if he had proved that the man was not struck by
him with the intention of killing him, the Governor would have rendered a
decision in accordance with military discipline by remitting the penalty of
homicide; for a crime is committed when the purpose to cause damage is present.
Those acts, however, which take place rather through unforeseen accident than
from design are, for the most part, attributed to misfortune, and not to an
intent to commit injury.
Published on the second of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of
Lsetus, Consul for the second time, and Cerealis, 216.
2. The Emperor Gordian to Quintianus.
He who, when in danger of his life, kills his aggressor or anyone else, should
have no fear of prosecution on this account.
Published on the third of the Nonesof April, during the Consulate of Arian and
Pappus, 244.
3. The Same Emperor to Quintianus.
When anyone kills another who attacks him with a sword, he should not be
considered a homicide, for the reason that the defender of his own life is not
held to have committed an offence.
4. The Emperor Gallienus to Monatius.
If (as you state) you have killed a robber, there is no doubt that it will be
decided that you have lawfully killed him who had the intention of depriving
you of life.
Published on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of
Valerius and Lucillus, 266.
5. Copy of the Imperial Epistle of the Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to
Agathus.
If it is true that he who asserts he did not intentionally commit the homicide,
but that it took place accidentally, where death appears to have resulted from
a kick, no doubt can arise upon this point, and We desire that he shall be
freed from any fear and suspicion to which he may have been liable from the
facts, as admitted, in conformity with what is set forth by Our annotation.
Given at Sirmium, on the seventh of the Kalendsof December, during the
Consulate of Diocletian, Consul for the fourth time, and Maximian, Consul for
the third time, 290. -
6. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Agotius.
If anyone should accuse you under the Lex Corneliarelating to assassins, you
must prove your innocence of the crime, and not defend yourself by alleging
that you were not of age.
Ordered at Rome, on the sixth of the Kalendsof November, under the Consulate of
the Csesars.
7. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Philiscus.
He who goes about armed with the intention of killing a man, just as he who
does kill one, or through whose evil design such an act is committed, shall be
punished with the penalty prescribed by the Lex Cornelia,relating to assassins.
Ordered at Nicomedia, on the seventh of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of the Csesars.
8. The Emperors Valentinian, Valens, and Gratian to Probus, Praetorian Prefect.
If any person of either sex should kill an infant, he or she is hereby notified
that they will be punished with death.
Published at Rome, on the seventh of the Idesof February, during the Consulate
of Gratian, Consul for the third time, and Equitius, 374.
9. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius to Cynegius,
Pr&torian Prefect.
Where a woman is found to have plotted the death of her husband, or to have had
the intention of killing him in any other way, or where
a husband has entertained a similar design against the life of his wife, all
the slaves of both husband and wife who were in the house at the time, without
excepting any of them, shall be put to torture.
Given at Constantinople, on the third of the Idesof December, during the
Consulate of Arcadius and Bauto, 385.

* TITLE XVII.
CONCERNING THOSE WHO KILL THEIR PARENTS OR CHILDREN.
1. The Emperor Constantine to Varinus, Vicegerent of Africa.
If anyone should hasten the end of either of his parents, his son, his
daughter, or any of those relatives whose murder is designated by the term
parricide, whether he committed the act secretly or openly, he shall suffer the
penalty of parricide, and shall neither be put to death by the sword, nor by
fire, nor by any other ordinary method, but shall be sewed up in a sack with a
dog, a cock, a viper, and a monkey, and, enclosed with these wild animals and
associated with serpents, he shall be either thrown into the sea, or into a
river, according to the nature of the locality; so that, while living, he may
be deprived of all use of the elements, and during the remainder of his
existence, he may be deprived of air, and, at his death, of the earth.
Given on the eleventh of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Licinius, Consul for the fifth time, and Crispus, 319.

* TITLE XVIII.
CONCERNING POISONERS, DIVINERS, AND OTHER CRIMINALS OF THE SAME DESCRIPTION.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Titius.
It is a more serious crime to kill a man by poison, than to cause his death by
means of a weapon.1
Published without date or designation of consulate.
1 Owing to the atrocious nature of the act, and the facility with which it can
be committed, affording the victim no opportunity for defence, the intentional
administration of poison was, at Common Law, always considered to indicate
deliberate malice.
"The poysoning of any man, whereof he dieth within the year, implieth malice,
and is adjudged willful murder of malice prepensed." (Coke, Institutes III, 7,
52.)
"He that wilfully gives poison to another, that hath provoked him or not, is
guilty of wilful murder; the reason is, because it is an act of deliberation,
odious in law, and presumes malice." (Hale, Pleas of the Crown I, XXVIII, Page
455.)
Modern enactments have rendered the mere administration of poison with
homicidal design a capital felony. "Whosoever shall administer to, or cause to
be taken by any person, any poison or other destructive thing with intent to
commit murder, shall be guilty of felony, and, being convicted thereof, shall
suffer death." (Stat. 1, Vie., C. 185, Archbold, Criminal Procedure, Vol. 1,
Page 942.)
American jurists do not recognize any difference between malice express and
implied. "Our only way of proving malice is by inferring it from
circumstances."
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Cxsars, to Tiberius.
It is a matter of public interest to learn and practice the science of
geometry, but the art of divination is damnable, and is strictly prohibited.
Ordered at Sirmium, on the thirteenth of the Kalends ofSeptember, during the
Consulate of the Caesars.
3. The Emperor Constantine to Maximus.
No haruspex, no priest, and none of those who are accustomed to practice this
art, shall approach the threshhold of another, either for this or for any other
purpose; but the friendship of men of this kind (even though it may be of long
standing) shall be rejected, and any haruspex who approaches another's house
shall be put to death by fire; and anyone who has, either by solicitation or
with the hope of reward, induced him to come, shall be deported to an island,
after his property has been confiscated.
We consider that an accuser of a crime of this kind should not be classed as an
informer, but should rather be worthy of reward.
Published at Rome, on the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of
Constantine, Consul for the fifth time, and Licinius, 312.
4. The Same Emperor and Csssar to Bassus, Praetorian Prefect.
The knowledge of those who, by means of magic arts, plot against the health or
lives of men, or turn chaste minds to licentiousness, should be punished, and
repressed by the severest laws. Those, however, who seek remedies for the
ailments of humanity, or, while in the country, innocently exert themselves to
preserve grapes from showers, or from the effects of rain or hail, ought not to
be liable to criminal accusations, as their efforts are directed not to the
injury of the health or reputation of mankind, but to prevent the gifts of God
and the labors of humanity from being destroyed.
Given at Aquileia, on the tenth of the Kalendsof June, during the Consulate of
Crispus and Constantius, 321.
5. The Emperor Constantius and the Ctesar Julian to the People.
No one shall consult an haruspex, a diviner, or a soothsayer, and wicked
confessions made to augurs and prophets must cease. Chaldeans, magicians, and
others who are commonly called malefactors on account of the enormity of their
crimes, shall no longer practice their infamous arts. Let all curiosity
relating to divination be at an
(Wharton, Criminal Law, Sec. 145.) Nor is the doctrine that death caused by the
deliberate administration of poison is wilful murder invariably accepted where
no statutory provision to the contrary exists.
"A homicide by poison is not necessarily murder at Common Law. If it is not, it
is not murder in the first degree. At the same time, when the evidence shows
that the death was effected by intentional and malicious poisoning, the court,
when not precluded by statute, may tell the jury that the offense is murder in
the first degree." (Ibid.,Sec. 511.)—ED.
end, for anyone who hereafter refuses obedience to Our orders shall be put to
death, and laid low with the avenging sword.
Given at Milan, on the eighth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate
of Constantius, Consul for the eighth time, and the Caesar Julian, 357.
6. The Same Emperor to the People.
Many persons do not hesitate to disturb the elements by the use of magic, plot
against the lives of innocent people, and, by the invocation of household gods,
dare to provide means by which anyone can destroy his enemies by evil arts.
Such person shall be thrown to wild beasts, as they are of a nature different
from that of ordinary mortals.
Given at Milan, on the day before the Nonesof December, during the Consulate of
Constantius, Consul for the ninth time, and Julian, Consul for the second time,
357.
7. The Same Emperor to Taurus, Prsetorian Prefect.
As the bodies of those who are in the enjoyment of high rank are exempt from
torture, except for certain crimes specified by the laws, and as magicians in
every portion of the world should be considered the enemies of the human race,
and also as those who belong to Our retinue directly offend Our Majesty when
they practice these arts, therefore, if a magician, or anyone accustomed to the
use of magic verses, and who is usually styled by the people a sorcerer, an
haruspex, a soothsayer, an augur, or a diviner, or anyone who employs himself
in the interpretation of dreams, or practices anything similar to the arts
above mentioned, should be found in My retinue, or in that of the Caesar, he
shall be deprived of his rank and punished, and shall not be exempt from
torture. And if, after having been convicted, he should continue to deny the
offence before those who have detected it, he shall be placed upon the rack,
and his sides torn by iron hooks, as these penalties are suitable for a crime
of such enormity.
Given on the third of the Nonesof July, during the Consulate of Titian and
Cerealis, 358.
8. The Emperors Valentinian and Valens to Modestus, Prsetorian Prefect.
The guilt of a person who studies things that are prohibited is equal to that
of him who teaches them.
Given at Constantinople, on the day before the Idesof December, during the
Consulate of Valentinian and Valens, 365.
9. The Emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius to Albinus, Prsetorian
Prefect.
Anyone who learns of, and surprises and seizes another polluted by the practice
of magic arts, must immediately expose him, and bring the enemy of the public
welfare into court.
If a driver, that is, a charioteer, or any other person, should attempt to
violate this law, or should oppress the victim of their perni-
cious arts with secret punishments, he shall not escape the death penalty, as
he is subject to suspicion for two reasons; first, because he either prevented
him from being publicly dealt with, lest he might reveal his accomplices in the
crime, and escape the severity of the laws and the torture to which he was
liable; or, because he may have formed an atrocious design to kill his own
enemy under the pretext of vengeance.
Given on the seventeenth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Timasius and Promotus, 389.

* TITLE XIX. CONCERNING THE VIOLATION OF SEPULCHRES.
1. The Emperor Gordian to Zeno.
Those who knowingly do not hesitate to purchase and sell property destined for
religious uses, especially when it has already been employed for that purpose,
are warned that although the sale is not valid in law, still, they are guilty
of the crime of injury to religion.
Published on the third of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Sabinus,
Consul for the second time, and Venustus, 241.
2. The Emperor Constantine to Tatian, Prefect of the City.
When a slave who is caught demolishing a tomb did so without the knowledge of
his master, he shall be sentenced to the mines. If, on the other hand, he was
induced to do so by the authority or order of his master, he shall be punished
with relegation. When anything taken from the tomb is found to have been
carried either to the city or country home of his master, the house or
building, no matter what it may be, shall be confiscated to the Treasury.
Given on the seventh of the Idesof July, during the Consulate of Acindynus and
Proculus, 340.
3. The Same Emperor to Limenius, Praetorian Prefect.
Where anyone either violates a tomb, or attempts to do so, and the judges of
the district neglect to punish the crime, they shall be fined not less than
twenty pounds of gold, which has been fixed as the penalty for violators of
tombs, and they shall be compelled to pay it into the Treasury of Our
Largesses.
Given on the fifth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Limenius and
Catulinus, 349.
4. The Same Emperor to the People.
Those who violate tombs, or, I should say, the houses of the dead, are
considered to have perpetrated a double crime; for, by destroying them they
robbed those who are buried, and by erecting new structures with the materials,
they contaminate the living. Therefore, if anyone should remove from a tomb
either stones, marble, columns, or any other materials to be used for building
purposes, or should do so with the intention of selling them, he shall be
compelled to pay ten
pounds of gold to the Treasury; or if anyone, defending his own tomb, should
file such a complaint in court, or some other person should bring the
accusation, or notify any official of the act, this penalty ought to be added
to the one formerly prescribed; for none of the punishments imposed upon those
who violate tombs are considered to have been repealed.
These penalties shall be inflicted upon him who handles the bodies of persons
who have been buried, or the remains of the same.
Given at Milan, on the Idesof June, during the Consulate of Constantine, Consul
for the ninth time, and the Caesar Julian, 357.
5. The Emperor Julian to the People.
The audacity of the violators of tombs extends even to injuring the busts of
the deceased and the consecrated mounds upon which they are raised; and our
ancestors always considered it a crime resembling sacrilege to take away stones
from them to disturb the soil, and to tear up the turf of the same. It is also
deemed an offence to remove the ornaments of tombs for the purpose of
decorating banqueting halls or porticoes.
We, therefore, having this in view, in the first place, forbid such acts to be
committed under the penalty of sacrilege, lest the respect to which deceased
persons are entitled may be violated.1
Given at Antioch, on the day before the Idesof February, during the Consulate
of Julian, Consul for the fourth time, and Sallust, 363.
6. The Emperor Justin to Theodore.
As it is unjust, and unworthy of Our reign for injury to be done to the remains
of deceased persons by those who allege that the latter were indebted to them,
and who, for the purpose of exacting the debt, interfere with their burial, We,
in order to prevent this injury from being committed hereafter, and those whose
duty it is to conduct the funeral of the deceased from losing their rights, do
hereby decree that any instruments which may have been executed by the heirs
before the corpse was buried, for the purpose of collecting what was alleged to
be due, or any admissions which have been made by them, or any security which
has been furnished, or any pledges which have been taken, shall be absolutely
void. All pledges which have been given, or money which has been paid, shall be
returned, and any sureties who have been furnished shall be released from
liability; and, generally speaking, everything shall be restored to its former
condition unaltered, and the principal matter, as it was in the beginning,
shall be disposed of in court.
Moreover, anyone who has been found guilty of a crime of this kind shall pay
fifty pounds of gold, or, if he has not the means to do so, he shall suffer
such corporeal punishment as may be inflicted by a competent judge.2
1 Proceedings for the violation of a tomb involved the penalty of infamy.
"Sepulcri violati actio infamiam irrogat."—ED.
2 It was the belief of the Romans, who practiced cremation, that a grave became
religious the moment the earth was cast upon the bones of the dead; and
Given at Constantinople, on the Kalendsof December, during the fifth Consulate
of Olybrius, 526.
Extract from Novel 60, Chapter I. Latin Text.
Likewise, anyone who enters the house of a dying person, and annoys either him
or others who are members of his family, or attaches seals to his property
without having employed the services of an
that then the rights conferred by the laws immediately attached to the place of
sepulture. "Nam prius quam in os inieota gleba est, locus ille, ubi crematum
est corpus, nihil habet religionis; iniecta gleba turn et illis humatus est, et
gleba vocatur, ao turn denique multa religiosa iura conplectitur."(Cicero, De
Legibus,II, 22, 57.) Even the tomb of a slave was also invested with this
sacred character, which was largely due to the fact that the spirits of
departed ancestors were deified, and appropriate sacrifices and other
ceremonies were, on certain occasions, regularly performed in their honor at
their sepulchres.
Violation of a grave was, in ancient times, punished with much greater severity
than it is at present.
In Greece, while the penalty was left to the discretion of the magistrate, it
was provided that it should be exemplary.
"He that defaceth a sepulchre, or lays one of a different family in that of
another, breaks it, eraseth the inscription, or beats down the pillar, shall
suffer condign punishment." (Potter, Antiquities of Greece I, XXVI, Page 207.)
Under the domination of the Visigoths, anyone who damaged a tomb, or robbed a
dead body, was compelled to give a pound of gold to the heirs of the deceased,
and if there were none, it was paid to the Royal Treasury, and the offender
received a hundred lashes. A slave was given two hundred, and then burned to
death. In every instance, the return of the stolen property was required. "Si
quis sepulcri violator extiterit; aut mortuum expoliaverit, et ei aut ornamenta
vel vesti-menta abstwlerit; si liber hoe feeerit, libram auri coactus exsolvat
hseredibus mortui, et quie abstulit reddat. Quod si hseredes non fuerint, fisco
nostro cogatur inferre, et prieterea C. flagella suscipiat. Servus vero si hoc
crimen admiserit,CC. flagella suscipiat, insuper et flammis ardentibus
exuratur, redditis nihilominus cunctis qua visus est abstulisse." (Forum
JudicumXI, II.)
The laws of Alfonso X imposed a fine of ten pounds of gold, and confiscated the
land on which the building materials taken from the tomb were used. If the fine
was not paid, the alternative was perpetual exile. Death was inflicted where
armed men robbed a corpse; when they were unarmed, the penalty was confinement
at hard labor for life.
"Aquel que sacare las piedras e los ladrillos de los monumentos, deuen perder
la lauor que fiziere con ellos, e el lugar en que los obrare deue ser del Rey,
e demas deue pechar a la Camara del Rey diez librus de oro; e si non ouiere de
que las pechar, deue ser desterrado para siempre. E los ladrones que
desotierran, o des-pojan los muertos, para furtar los panos en que estan
embueltos, si lo fizieren con armas, deuen morir porende; mas si lo fizieren
sin armas, deuen ser condenados para siempre a las lauores del Rey." (Las Siete
PartidasVII, IX, XII.)
Disinterment of a corpse for gain or dissection was a misdemeanor at Common
Law, and became a felony only where the shroud or any of the clothing was
taken, the ownership of which was vested in the legal representatives of the
deceased. "The property of the sheets was in the executors, administrators or
other owner of them, for the dead body isnot capable of any property." (Coke,
Institutes III, XVLII, 110.)
A corpse itself is not susceptible of larceny. "The dead body of a human being
is not capable of being stolen." (Stephen, A Digest of Criminal Law VI, XXXIV,
Art. 292.) It is as yet undetermined whether this applies to skeletons and
anatomical preparations of dead bodies, or only to the corpse in its entirety.
(Ibid.)This would probably depend upon their identification, an almost
impossible undertaking, unless their mere possession would afford the
presumption of
officer legally authorized to do this, shall lose his right of action after the
death of the person aforesaid, and whatever he has taken can be recovered from
him by the heirs of the injured party, the third part of his property shall be
confiscated, and he himself shall be branded with infamy.
He, also, is liable to the same penalties who interferes with the funeral
ceremonies of a deceased person, or forbids them to be celebrated.
Extract from Novel 115, Chapter V. Latin Text.
No one shall hereafter be annoyed on account of any claim owed by a deceased
person until nine days have elapsed from the time of his death; and if any bond
or similar security should be executed, it will be void. The rights of
creditors shall not, however, be prejudiced by this provision.

* TITLE XX. ON THE LEX FABIA CONCERNING KIDNAPPING.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Placidus.
Let your father proceed civilly by an action in rembefore a competent
magistrate against him by whom he alleges his female slave has been seduced,
and that kidnapping has been perpetrated by carrying her away. If he should
gain his case, he can also prosecute him criminally under the Fabian Law. If
the slave was kidnapped, he will not be forbidden to bring an accusation
against him for this offence.1
stolen property. The interests of medical science are obviously opposed to the
unqualified adoption of this principle.
The English rule, above stated, is generally applicable in the United States.
(VideWharton Criminal Law, Arts. 1098, 1176.) The horrible and unfeeling
practice of grave-robbing for the purpose of extorting money from the relatives
of the deceased, so prevalent in this country in recent times, has caused the
enactment of many criminal statutes imposing long terms of imprisonment at hard
labor for
this offence.
Violation of sepulchres is punished in Spain by imprisonment for from one month
and one day to six months, and a fine of from 125 to 1250 pesetas (Codigo Penal
de Espana,Art. 350); in France, by imprisonment of from three months to a year,
and a fine of 16 to 200 francs (Code Penal de France,Art. 360) ; in Belgium, by
imprisonment of from one month to one year, and a fine of from 26 to 200 francs
(Code des Lois Penales Beiges,Art. 453); in Italy, by imprisonment for from
three months to three years, and a fine of from 50 to 1500 lire (Codice Penale
del Regna d'ltalia,Art. 144); in Portugal, by imprisonment not to exceed one
year, and a corresponding fine (Codigo Penal Portuguez,Art. 247); in Germany,
by imprisonment at hard labor for not more than two years (Strafgesetzbuch fur
das Deutsche Reich,Art. 167); in Austria, by from one to six months'
imprisonment, and the penalty for theft, in addition, where anything is stolen
(All-gemeines Strafgesetz,Art. 306); in Sweden, by imprisonment for not longer
than six months, and a fine of at least 25 riksdalers (Sveriges Rikes LagXI,
Cap. Sec. 4) ; in Japan, by penal servitude for from two to five years
(Criminal Code of Japan, Arts. 220, 221, 222.)—ED.
1 The Lex Fabia de Plagiariiswas enacted for the purpose of punishing the
kidnapping, forcible detention, concealment, purchase or sale of a freeman, a
man-
Published on the twelfth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of
Antoninus, Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
2. The Same Emperor to Aurelius.
If you can prove that your slave was harbored by Julianus, and concealed by him
for some time, and that he afterwards persuaded him to take to flight, you can
either yourself, or by your attorney, prosecute him for the crime, or you can
bring the proper action against him, that is to say, one for having corrupted
the slave.
Published on the seventh of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of
Antoninus, Consul for the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
3. The Emperor Alexander to Cornelius.
In order for the penalty of the Fabian Law to be incurred, the charge must be
signed, the accusation made, and the sentence passed.
Published on the eighth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Julian,
Consul for the second time, and Crispinus, 225.
4. The Emperor Gordian to Paulina.
The sentence pronounced by the Attorney for the Crown, if he did not at the
time occupy the place of the Governor, who has power to act under the Fabian
Law, is void; as the administration of this law comes solely within the
jurisdiction of the Governor of the province.
Published on the third of the Nonesof December, during the Consulate of Gordian
and Aviola, 240.
5. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus and the Caesars to Juliana.
If your adversary took your brother away, you should file a criminal accusation
against him under the Fabian Law, before the Governor of the province.
Published on the Nonesof May, during the Consulate of ^Emilianus and Bassus,
260.
6. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Martiana.
It is not lawful either to sell or give away a fugitive slave. Hence you will
understand that you are liable under the law which imposes a certain penalty to
be paid to the Treasury on account of crimes of this description, except in the
case of co-heirs and partners who, in the division of the common property, are
permitted to bid against one another for a fugitive slave. Therefore, in this
instance, it is lawful to sell a fugitive slave, and the sale will be valid
when he is found and seized by the purchaser.
Published on the third of the Ides ofMarch, during the Consulate of the
Caesars.
umitted slave, or one actually in servitude, but to whom the vendor had no
title. The detestation to which this crime was regarded by the Romans as
affecting the liberty of the citizen is disclosed by the penalties prescribed.
The magistrate was invested with discretionary power, and could sentence
persons of rank to relegation and the confiscation of half their property, and
crucify, or send offenders of inferior position to the mines. A slave who had
been convicted of kidnapping was required to remain in bondage for ten years
after his master's death. By the laws of the early Emperors, this crime always
incurred the penalty of death.—ED.
7. The Same Emperor to Maximus, Prefect of the City.
As you state that certain slaves have been removed from the city by kidnapping,
and that freeborn men are sometimes carried away in the commission of the same
crime, We decree that you shall have permission to punish such an offence with
extreme severity, and, therefore, if you find anyone guilty of it, do not
hesitate to sentence him to death, in order that others may be deterred by the
penalty, and not venture, by an audacious act of this kind, to kidnap either
slaves or freemen from the city, and sell them.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof December, during the Consulate of Diocletian,
Consul for the third time, and Maximian, 287.
8. The Same Emperors and Csssars to Confidius.
The Governor of the province, after having first decided the right of
ownership, will determine whether the accusation of kidnapping should be heard
or not; for if the slave should be found to be your property, the proof of
ownership having been established, the intention of the crime will be lacking.
If, however, after the question of ownership has been decided, it should be
proved that the slave belongs to another, the Governor will hear the criminal
accusation.
Published on the eighth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Diocletian, Consul for the fourth time, and Maximian, Consul for the third
time.
9. The Same Emperors and Csssars to Eugenius.
It is a positive rule of law that he who conceals another's slave is liable
under the Fabian Law.
Ordered at Heraclia, on the third of the Idesof May, during the Consulate of
the above-mentioned Emperors, 290.
10. The Same Emperors and Csssars to Diza.
It is settled that he who purchases from another a slave that has been
kidnapped, and he is not proved to have been an accomplice in the perpetration
of the offence, is not criminally liable.
Ordered during the Nonesof November, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.
11. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Marpiata.
The sale of a kidnapped slave does not change the status, nor, where the crime
is committed by the kidnapping of a free person, is the status of the latter
affected.
Ordered during the Idesof November, during the Consulate of the above-mentioned
Emperors.
12. The Same Emperors and Csssars to Mutianus.
Anyone who knowingly harbors a fugitive slave and receives stolen property is
liable on this ground to an action of theft; and the Governor of the province
must cause the property to be restored to you, together with the ordinary
penalty. If, however, you should bring an
accusation for the crime of kidnapping, he will not hesitate to afford you a
hearing.
Ordered on the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of the Caesars.
13. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Severinus.
The accusation of the crime of kidnapping shall be included among those of
public offences.
Ordered on the fifth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of the
Caesars.
14. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Callisthenes.
An accusation for the crime of kidnapping cannot be legally brought when those
who are alleged to be guilty assert that they thought that the slaves or free
persons in question belonged to them, and that they had good grounds for this
belief, and did not adopt it as a pretext for committing the act.
Ordered at Nicomedia, on the day before the Nonesof December, during the
Consulate of the Caesars.
15. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Pomponius.
Anyone, by selling a freeman without his consent, becomes liable to the penalty
for kidnapping if he is aware of his condition.
Given at Nicomedia, on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of the Caesars.
16. The Emperor Constantine to Domitius Celsus, Vicegerent of Africa.
Those who inflict wretchedness upon parents by kidnapping their living children
are liable to be sentenced to the mines, in addition to the other penalties
already prescribed by the laws. Where, however, anyone is accused and convicted
of a crime of this kind, if he is a slave or a freedman, he shall be thrown to
wild beasts; if he is freeborn, he shall perish by the sword.
Given on the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Constantine, Consul for
the fourth time, and Licinius, 315.

* TITLE XXI.
OONNTHE VlSCELLIAN LAW.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian and the Csesars to Bacchus.
The Viscellian Law prohibits persons of the condition of freedmen from daring
to assume such honors and dignities as belong to those who are freeborn, or to
usurp the office of decurion, unless they have been authorized to do so by
having obtained the right from the Emperor to wear gold rings, for then they
are entitled to the appearance, but not to the actual status of free birth
during their lives; and,
without any risk to themselves, can perform the public duties of those offices
to which freeborn persons are eligible.
Moreover, any freedman, who declares that he is freeborn, will not only be
civilly liable for his acts, but can also be prosecuted criminally under the
Viscellian Law. He, also, who usurps the decurionate, shall be branded with
infamy.
There is no doubt that individual freedmen, while in the country of their
patrons are, in proportion to their means, required to discharge the personal
duties to which men of this kind are usually liable.
Published at Antioch, on the second of the Idesof February, during the
Consulate of the Caesars.

* TITLE XXII. ON THE CORNELIAN LAW WITH REFERENCE TO FORGERY.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Severinus.
If you accuse the other party of the crime of the substitution of a child, the
trial of the case, which is a capital one, should not be deferred until the boy
reaches the age of puberty, which has already been decided by Myself and My
Divine Father, Severus; for it is probable that the woman who is accused will
defend herself in every way possible, to avoid suffering the penalty of death.
Published on the Nonesof March, during the Consulate of the two Aspers, 213.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Valerius.
It has been clearly stated in the Rescripts of My ancestors that, when the
crime of forgery has been committed by a debtor for the purpose of postponing
payment, he should, nevertheless, be compelled to discharge the debt,
irrespective of the criminal prosecution.
Published on the third of the Nonesof May, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and ^lianus, 224.
3. The Same Emperor to Cassius.«
Although you have accepted the legacy left you under the will which you allege
is forged, and which you accuse your father's wife, that is to say, your step-
mother, of having substituted for the genuine will, which she abstracted at a
time when you did not know that a crime had been committed, you will,
nevertheless, not be prevented from bringing a criminal accusation against her,
after the legal formalities have been complied with.
Published on the eleventh of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of
Albinus and Maximus, 228.
4. The Same Emperor to Maximus.
Those who make use of forged rescripts should be punished by a penalty worthy
of the offence, and of exemplary severity. Anyone, however, who has been
deceived by another, and who can prove his
innocence, and produce the person from whom he received the forged document,
shall be released.
Published on the fourth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of
Albinus and Maximus, 228.
5. The Same Emperor to Petronius.
My principles forbid an accusation of forgery, or of any other capital crime,
to be brought against your mother, but this matter does not deprive her of any
pecuniary rights; since if any doubt exists with reference to the will in
question under which your mother claims a trust, an inquiry can be instituted
as to its genuineness, without fear of a criminal proceeding.
Published on the third of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Agricola and Clement, 231.
6. The Emperor Philip and the Csesar Philip to Culpius.
Anyone who has asserted that a will is false, and has lost his case, will have
no right to a bequest left by the deceased under the terms of said will.
Published on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of
Philip and Titian, 246.
7. The Emperors Valerian and Gattienus and the Csesar Valerian to Heliodorus.
You yourself state that when your adversaries first produced the instruments in
question, you suspected their genuineness; therefore, having made a compromise,
it will be difficult for the Governor of the province to permit you to denounce
as forged the documents which you have once accepted.
Published on the third of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Fuscus
and Bassus, 240.
8. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Marinus.
If you state that certain codicils were forged by the persons against whom you
filed your petition, they cannot escape the accusation denying that they
availed themselves of the same; for those alone can be benefited by abstaining
from the use of an instrument of this kind who are not themselves alleged to
have been the forgers of it, and whom the employment alone of the said
instrument would render liable.
Those, however, who after criminally forging the codicils, have incurred the
severity of the Cornelian Law, cannot avoid punishment for the crime, by
setting up the defence that they have refused to make use of them.
Published on the third of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of
.^Emilianus and Bassus, 260.
9. The Emperors Carinus and Numerianus to Mesius.If you should prove before the
Governor of the province that you are the heir at law of the person who wrote
the codicil, the ordinary
rule is that, after you have been placed in possession of the estate, you must
execute the trusts which have been lawfully bequeathed, unless it is your
intention to prove that the codicil is forged. But if you have instituted
criminal proceedings, and they have been dismissed through Our indulgence, you
will still be entitled to an investigation, and can bring a civil action in
order to determine the genuineness of the codicil. Published on the third of
the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of Carinus, Consul for the second
time, and Numerianus, 284.
10. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Legitim,us.
If you intend to accuse your uncle's wife of the crime of the substitution of a
child, you must bring and prove your accusation before the Governor of the
province.
Published on the eleventh of the Kalendsof October, during the Consulate of
Diocletian, Consul for the second time, and Aristobulus, 285.
11. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Isidore.
Where a pecuniary case can be referred to ordinary judges, they can, in
conformity with the opinion of that most learned jurist, Paulus, also decide
civilly with reference to the genuineness of written instruments.
Published on the tenth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of
Diocletian, Consul for the third time, and Maximian, 287.
12. The Same Emperors and Ctesars to Primus.
Prosecution for the crime of forgery, like almost all others, is not barred by
prescription, unless twenty years have elapsed.1
Ordered on the sixth of the Idesof January, during the Consulate of the
Cassars.
1 It was the ancient rule in England, in accordance with the maxim, "Nullum,
tempus occurrit Regi,"that the lapse of no time, however long, would be a bar
to either civil or criminal proceedings instituted in the name of the Crown.
This was afterwards changed by custom as well as statute. "At Common Law
appeals (i. e.formal accusations) were to be brought within a year and day
after the offence committed." (Danvers, A General Abridgment of the Common Law,
Vol. I, Page 491; Britton, De Legibus Anglicanis,Cap. XXIV, Pages 45, 46;
Staunforde, Les Plees del CoronII, Cap. 13.) The limitation is said by
Blackstone to have been derived from the Goths. "Prsescriptio annalis qux
currit adversus actorem, si de homicida ei noh constat intra ammum a ciede
facta nee quenquam interea arguet et accusat."(Commentaries on the Laws of
England IV, XXIII, Page 315.) By Stat. 13, Car. II, Chap. \,the time was
shortened in cases of treason. "No Person by virtue of this Act shall incur any
Penalty unless he be prosecuted within Six Months after the Offence committed,
and indicted within Three Months after such Prosecution." (Wingate, Abridgment
of all the Statutes from the Beginning of Magna Charta, Page 631.) By the
Treason Act, 1695, it was extended to three years, except only when the
assassination of the King by poison or otherwise had been planned.
(VideStephen, Commentaries on the Laws of England VI, VI, Page 144.)
As a rule, the prosecution of felonies is not barred by statutory enactment in
England or our country. This does not include the laws of the United States^
which provide that no prosecution, trial, or punishment of any capital offence
shall
13. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Marcus.
Anyone who states in writing that a certain person was present and received his
property, when in fact he was absent, does not prejudice the rights of the said
person who was not aware of the facts, but renders himself liable to criminal
prosecution.
Published on the sixth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors.
14. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Gentianus.
It is well known that anyone who conceals or abstracts a will is guilty of the
crime of deceit.
Ordered at Sirmium, on the third of the Kalendsof January, under the Consulate
of the above-mentioned Emperors.
15. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Rufus.
If a creditor, acting in collusion with his debtor, sold you the tract of land,
he has committed the crime of deceit, and has done you no injury, but, on the
other hand, has rendered himself liable to prosecution for the offence.
Ordered on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of
the Csesars.
16. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Fortunatus.
There are two ways open to a person desiring to contest the genuineness of a
will. Therefore, although you cannot institute criminal proceedings by an
attorney, still you will not be prevented from bringing a civil action
impeaching the genuineness of the will, as the accused cannot only legally be
sued by another, but can also be criminally prosecuted by him who brings the
civil action.
Ordered at Sirmium, on the eighth of the Idesof February, during the Consulate
of the Caesars.
17. The Same Emperors and Ctesars to Menelaus.
As a forged will or codicil cannot be rendered valid by the lapse of any period
of time, so one which is genuine and legal cannot be an-
take place after three years from the date of its commission have expired. When
the revenue laws have been violated, the term is five years. (Barnes, Federal
Code, Arts. 1445, 1448.) Many of the States have statutes of limitations
applicable to misdemeanors.
In France, a malefactor is not liable to prosecution for a serious crime after
ten years from its perpetration, provided no legal investigation of the same
has been begun in the interval. Criminal proceedings for minor offences cannot
be instituted after three years. (Code Penal de France,Arts. 637, 638.)
Spain prescribes criminal action for felonies after twenty, fifteen, and ten
years; for other breaches of the law the time is from two months to one year.
(Codigo Penal de Espana,Art. 133.)
In Italy, the term varies for from six months to twenty years, dependent upon
the nature of the offence (Codice Periale del Regna d'ltalia,Art. 91) ; in
Germany, it runs from three months to twenty years (Strafgesetz fur das
Deutsche Reich,Sec. 67) ; and in Portugal, from one to fifteen years (Codigo
Penal Portuguez,Art. 125).—ED.
nulled. Therefore if you wish to punish the crime, either by a public
accusation or a civil suit, the Governor of the province, provided he has
previously been convinced of the truth of your assertion by other .evidence,
will only direct those slaves to be produced who can be interrogated.
Ordered at Sirmium, on the third of the Idesof February, during the Consulate
of the Caesars.
18. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Maximus.
Legal possession does not render a title valid which was fraudulent in the
beginning, therefore you can institute a criminal prosecution against those
whom you allege are contesting the ownership of the land with you.
Ordered on the third of the Nonesof March, during the Consulate
of the Csesars.
19. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Cosmia.
Even if you are interested in the matter, still you should deliberate carefully
in your own mind as to your course, in order that you may not bring an unlawful
accusation by alleging that the instrument which you have signed is forged. But
as it is not permissible to accuse women of forgery in matters in which they
are not directly interested, and you acknowledge that you formerly gave this
same land to another, you ask that the power of bringing the accusation be
granted you contrary to the rule of law.
Ordered on the eighth of the Idesof March, during the Consulate of the Csesars.
20. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Rufinus.
The fact that the copy of the rescript was incorrectly made should not delay
its investigation by the judge to whom the case was assigned, as the parties
will not be liable to a criminal prosecution unless they have intentionally
committed forgery.
Signed on the eleventh of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of the
Csesars.
21. The Emperor Constantine to Mechilius Hilariamis.
If a decurion should write a will, a codicil, or any other instrument for.the
disposition of the property of a person who is dying, or should officially draw
up any public or private documents, and then be prosecuted for forgery, he
shall be deprived of his office, and subjected to torture if the case requires
it.
He, however, who is accused of an act of this kind, does not immediately cease
to be a decurion, for he will remain such so far as his municipal functions are
concerned; but he cannot avail himself of the privileges of the decurionate
with reference to the matter in controversy, the truth of which is to be
ascertained. Nor can he who was formerly a notary, and afterwards became a
decurion, plead the
privileges of this office for the purpose of escaping torture on account of
documents which he formerly drew up, as their genuineness must be proved by the
author himself if circumstances demand it.
Given on the third of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of Sabinus
and Rufinus, 316.
22. The Same Emperor to Maximus, Prefect of the City.
When the investigation of a case of forgery takes place, every attempt must be
made to obtain proofs, witnesses, comparison of documents, and all other
methods of ascertaining the truth, nor shall the accuser be the only person
interrogated, or be required to furnish all the evidence, but the judge must
occupy an intermediate position between the two parties, and not divulge what
he thinks by means of any interlocutory decree, unless he gives some
indication, which is solely required by his duty as a magistrate, for the
purpose of furthering the proceedings; and he must finally state his opinion in
the decision which he renders.
We limit the prosecution of a criminal case of this kind to the term of two
years, which it shall not be lawful for either party to exceed. And the
beginning of the same shall arise at the time when the accusation is contested
before a competent judge; and, after the crime has been proved, the person who
committed the forgery shall be put to death, if the enormity of the offence
demands it; or he shall be sentenced to deportation.
Published on the eighth of the Kalendsof April, in the Forum of Trajan, during
the Consulate of Constantine, Consul for the seventh time, and the Caesar
Constantius.
23. The Emperors Valens, Gratian, and Valentinian to Maxima, Prsetorian
Prefect.
We grant permission to litigants, after a disputed instrument has been
presented to the court, for him who questions its genuineness, to be compelled
to publicly state whether he intends to proceed criminally or civilly with
reference to the alleged forgery. If he intends to proceed criminally, he must
bring an accusation for forgery, and as soon as the civil suit has been
terminated by a decision, the criminal prosecution can take place, so that if
anyone should attempt to introduce wills, receipts, attestations, public or
private accounts, agreements, letters, final dispositions, written proofs of
donations, bills of sale, or any other documents, the contestant shall have the
power to bring the accusation.
With reference to the civil investigation, however, a less rigid examination of
the parties litigant should be made, as the judge who presides over the
criminal trial can punish the false statements of the plaintiff and the
criminal acts of the defendants with legal penalties.
Published at Rome, on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate
of Valens, Consul for the fifth time, and Valentinian, 376.
24. The Emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius to Proculus,'Prefect of
the City.
Whether a civil or a criminal proceeding (as may be selected by the plaintiff)
has been instituted with reference to codicils, or other written instruments
which have been produced in court, We grant permission for the proof of the
genuineness of said instruments first to be required of him who offered them in
evidence, and then he who , is ready to prove that they are forged shall be
allowed to establish his
allegations.1
Given on the tenth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of Timasius
and Promotus', 389.
1 The practice of forging, altering, destroying, and substituting wills having
become so prevalent under the Republic as to become an intolerable abuse, the
Lex Corneliawas enacted, at the instance of Sylla, with a view to preventing it
by means of the severe penalty of interdiction of fire and water. This law did
not, however, apply to other crimes of a similar character, and its scope was
greatly enlarged by subsequent legislation, so as to include false swearing,
subornation of perjury, forgery, the execution or attestation of any written
instrument, conspiracy to cause the death of innocent persons, counterfeiting,
and the sale or suppression of testimony. This was the crimen falsiof Roman
jurisprudence, which, while embracing nearly every species of deceit by whose
agency anyone might be prejudiced, or deprived of his rights, was generally
synonymous with the fabrication, or fraudulent alteration of documents to
which, when not otherwise distinctly specified, it was presumed to refer. The
punishment was afterwards changed to deportation, hard labor in the mines,
crucifixion, and death.
The crimen falsi,with, however, a more restricted meaning and application, was
known to the Common Law of England, and originally had particular reference to
the forgery of the seal of the king and of those of members of the royal
family. It also included the attaching of false seals to private instruments.
The penalty was either banishment or death by hanging. "Crimen vero falsi
dicitur, cum quis accusatus fuerit quod sigillum regis, vel appellatus quod
sigillum Domini sui de cujus familia fuerit, falsaverit, & brevia inde
consignaverit, vel chartum aliquam vel literam ad exhxredationem Domini vel
alterius damnum sic sigillaverit; & quibus casibus si quis inde convictus
fuerit, detractari meruit & suspendi. Et quod de hujusmodi falsar1 dicitur, de
sigilla adulterina chartis & literis apponenti-bus dicatur id idem."(Fleta,
Commentarius Juris Anglicani I,22.)
In after times, the signification of the term became fully as extended as under
the Civil Law, to which it owed its origin.
The Visigoths placed perjury and forgery in the same category, and punished
both alike. (Forum JudicumII, IV, VII; VII, V, II.)
By the Babylonian law, a perjurer received the same penalty as the person
against whom he swore falsely would have received, had his crime been
successful.
"If a man, in a case (pending judgment), bear false (threatening) witness, or
do not establish the testimony that he has given, if that case be a case
involving life, that man shall be put to death."
"If a man (in a case) bear witness for grain or money (as a bribe), he shall
himself bear the penalty imposed in that case." (The Code of Hammurabi 3, 4.)
This rule was also adopted by the Hebrews. "And the judge shall make diligent
inquisition; and, behold, if the witness be a false witness, and hath testified
falsely against his brother:
"Then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto his brother."
(Deuteronomy XIX, 18, 19.)
Mohammedan authorities vary as to the punishment to be inflicted upon one who
gives false testimony. Some confine themselves to publicly denouncing the
culprit as infa^nous; others declare he should be scourged. (The Hedaya II,
XXI.)
In ancient Athens, the perjurer could be compelled to answer in a private
proceeding at the instance of the injured party. "Let the penalty of the action

* TITLE XXIII.
CONCERNING THOSE WHO DRAW UP WILLS UNDER WHICH THEY ARE BENEFICIARIES.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Valatius.
Although jurists hold that it is contrary to the Cornelian Law for an
emancipated son, at the dictation of his father to write in a will, that he is
his heir, still, if before the will was drawn up he would have been his lawful
successor, and had acquired possession of the property, he would be considered
his heir; just as if your father had appointed you his heir with his own hand,
and you had only discharged your duty as his son.
Published on the Nonesof September, during the Consulate of the two Aspers,
213.
2. The Same Emperor to Atticius.
If the testator, who wrote the codicil with his own hand, stated therein that
either a legacy or a trust was left to you, you will not be considered to have
incurred the penalty imposed by the Decree of the Senate. But if he mentioned
in the codicil that he had dictated the will, you should not claim the legacy
or the trust, and you will be released from liability for the penalty on
account of Our Imperial indulgence.
Published on the Idesof December, during the Consulate of Antoninus, Consul for
the fourth time, and Balbinus, 214.
3. The Emperor Alexander to Martial.
It was forbidden by the Decree of the Senate and the Edict of the Divine
Claudius that those who write the wills of others—even though at the dictation
of the testators—should include in them any bequest to themselves, and the
penalty of the Cornelian Law is imposed upon anyone who does so. The Senate and
the Emperors very rarely pardon anyone who requests it, when he attempts to
excuse himself on the
called tytvboiiaprvpiabe in force against those who bear, or suborn false
witnesses." (Potter, Antiquities of Greece XXVI, Sec. 19.)
Forgery, as a branch of the crimen falsi,was formerly punished in Scotland by
the amputation of the hand. The offence was afterwards made capital.
(VideErskine, Principles of the Law of Scotland IV, IV, 34.)
The sentence for perjury was confiscation, imprisonment for a year and a day,
infamy, and incapacity to again testify in court. (VideMackenzie, The Laws and
Customes of Scotland in Matters Criminal I, XXIX.)
In the United'States, as in England, unless special statutory provisions have
been enacted declaring prosecution of forgery at Common Law abolished, it may
be instituted. Where certain kinds of forgery have been defined as felonies,
those not enumerated are still punished as misdemeanors under the Common Law.
(VideWharton, A Treatise on Criminal Law, Sec. 859.)
The same rule, to a certain extent, applies to perjury. "Perjury is at common
law simply a misdemeanor. And false swearing, when not technically perjury,
may, nevertheless, be at Common Law indictable as an independent misdemeanor,
when the oath is taken to affect a judicial right." (Ibid.,Sec. 1508.)—ED.
ground of ignorance, and offers to reject whatever has been left to him
by the will.
Published on the seventeenth of the Kalends ofApril, during the Consulate of
Maximus, Consul for the second time, and ^Elianus, 224.
4. The Same Emperor to Crescens.
Any legacies which a husband wrote with his own hand in the will of his wife
are held not to have been written, and the penalty of the Cornelian Law will
apply if pardon is not obtained.
Published on the third of the Nonesof February, during the Consulate of Fuscus,
Consul for the second time, and Dexter, 226.
5. The Same Emperor to the Soldier Gallieniis.
The slave whom you mentioned in the will of your fellow-soldier, by his order,
as having been left to you, is considered as not bequeathed, and therefore you
cannot claim the legacy. The penalty of the Cornelian Law, however, so far as
you are concerned, is remitted through My indulgence, for I think that you were
rather mistaken than guilty of malice.
Published on the seventeenth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of
Fuscus, Consul for the second time, and Dexter, 226.
6. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Aufidiiis.
If you, under the direction of your master, wrote with your own hand in his
will that you were to obtain your freedom, and as you state that your master
did not sign the will, and did not expressly admit, by any written instrument,
that you were entitled to your freedom, the terms of the Decree of the Senate
oppose your receiving it. You are, however, released from the penalty of
forgery, as you could not antagonize your master.
Published on the sixth of the Idesof December, during the Consulate of
Diocletian, Consul for the fourth time, and Maximian, Consul for the third
time, 290.

* TITLE XXXXIIVV..CONCERNING COUNTERFEIT MONEY.
1. The Emperor Constantine to Jamiarius.
As certain makers of counterfeit money are perpetrating their crime in secret,
all persons are notified that they are required to detect men of this kind, so
that their guilt having been ascertained, they may be delivered up to the
judge, and immediately be put to torture to compel them to reveal their
accomplices, and then be punished as they deserve. We grant immunity to their
accusers, and as their civil conditions vary, rules are hereby established by
Us with reference to each of these.
If any soldier should permit a criminal of this description, who has been
arrested, to escape, he shall be punished with death; and anyone
not a soldier, who is guilty of such an offence, shall be denied the right of
appeal. If a soldier, or an officer, should himself commit this crime, he shall
be brought before competent judges with due regard to his rank.
Any house or field where counterfeiting has taken place shall be confiscated to
the Treasury, and if the owner was in the neighborhood, he shall be punished
for carelessness or neglect, even if he was not aware of the commission of that
offence, unless being ignorant in the beginning, he divulged the crime as soon
as he found it out; for, in this instance, his land or his house will not be
liable to confiscation.
When, however, he was at a great distance from his house or his land at the
time, he will sustain no injury, but the agent in charge of the property, the
slaves, the tenants, or the serfs, whose services are employed in its
management, together with the individual who actually perpetrated the offence,
shall be capitally punished.
We, however, consider widows and minors worthy of special indulgence, and
direct that widows, who may have been in the vicinity, should not be deprived
of their houses or lands, if they themselves were in no way implicated in so
serious a crime. Moreover, children under the age of puberty, even if they are
accomplices, shall not suffer any loss, because their age, which renders them
deficient in judgment, release them from liability. But if their guardians are
in the neighborhood, they will incur the penalty, for they should not be
ignorant of what their wards are doing; and if they are solvent, as much of
their property shall be forfeited to the Treasury as their wards would have
been compelled to pay had they been convicted.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof December, during the second Consulate of
the Cassars, Crispus and Constantine, 521.
2. The Same Emperor to TertuUus, Prefect of the City.
When anyone makes counterfeit money, We order that his entire property shall be
confiscated to Our Treasury, for We wish that money shall be coined only in Our
mints. Those who are guilty of counterfeiting have committed high treason, and
a reward is promised to their accusers. Whenever a counterfeiter of solidi,or
anyone who has placed them in circulation, is convicted, he shall instantly,
and without delay, be put to death by fire.1
Given at Milan, on the day before the Nonesof July, during the Consulate of
Constantine, Consul for the seventh time, and Con-stantius, 326.
1 The classification of this offence, as well as its mode of punishment, was
borrowed directly by England from the Civil Law. It was specifically made
treasonable by the Stat. De Proditionibus,25 Ed. Ill, 5, 2 (Wingate, An Exact
Abridgment of all the Statutes, Page 627), prior to which time no clear or
precise definition of the most serious crime against the state had been
formulated. Counterfeiting the King's seal or money, had, however, always been
treason at Common Law, under the title of crimen falsi. (VideGlanvil, Tractatus
de Legibus & Con-suetudinibus Regni Anglia}I, II, XIV, Vill.)
"Continet etiam sub se crimen Isesse maiestatis, crimen falsi, quod quidem
multiplex est: vt si quis falsauerit sigillum domini regis, vel monetam
reproba/m
3. The Emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius to Rufinus, Prsetorian
Prefect.
If anyone should extort the privilege of coining money, either by virtue of a
rescript or a permit issued by Us, he shall not only lose the benefit of the
permission which he has obtained, but will also suffer the penalty which he
deserves.
Given at Constantinople, on the Idesof July, during the Consulate of
Theodosius, Consul for the third time, and Abundantius, 393.

* TITLE XXV. CONCERNING THE CHANGE OF NAME.
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Julian.
As in the beginning, private individuals have the right, for the purpose of
recognition, to give their children such names and surnames as they may desire,
so a change of name does not prejudice innocent persons. Therefore, if you are
a freeman, you can legally change your name or surname without committing a
fraud; and you are not forbidden to do so in accordance with the laws which
have been frequently enacted on this subject, and your rights will not, on this
account, be prejudiced in the future.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors.

* TITLE XXVI.
ON THE JULIAN LAW RELATING TO POLITICAL CORRUPTION.
1. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Pompeianus, Prefect of the City.
Let no one presume to again apply for the office of commander, enumerator,
jailer, or any other employment, as one term of these is
fabricauerit & huiusmodi."(Bracton, De Legibus & Consuetudinibus AnglixIII,
118b.)
Coke remarks with reference to the above-mentioned statute, "The forging of the
king's coine is high treason, without utterance of it, for by this act the
counterfeiting is made high treason." (Institutes III, I, Page 16.)
Even so late as 1721, a woman was, under circumstances of incredible atrocity,
publicly burnt at Tyburn for coining. (VidePike, A History of Crime in England,
Vol. II, Page 288.)
The Anglo-Saxon law, suggestive of the Lex Talionis,imposed the penalty ol
amputation without the right to commute it. "He who after this shall make false
(money), let him forfeit the hands with which he wrought that false, and not
redeem them with anything neither with gold nor with silver." (Ancient Laws and
Institutes of England, Laws of King Cnut, Sec. 8.)
By the old Scotch law, the property of anyone guilty of falsun,or
counterfeiting, was confiscated, and he was either burnt or hanged. (Mackenzie,
The Laws and Customes of Scotland in Matters Criminal I, XXXVI, Page 383.)—ED.
sufficient for the public welfare. If anyone of such persons should, by means
of an Imperial Rescript, fraudulently acquire an office a second time, what he
obtained in this way shall be considered as void, and he shall be held to a
strict accountability for the acts which he performed during his previous
administration.
Those who violate this law shall be sentenced to the penalty of deportation, in
accordance with the terms of the Lex Julia,relating to political corruption.
Given at Milan, on the day before the Kalendsof June, during the Consulate of
Stilicho and Aurelian, 400.

* TITLE XXVII. ON THE JULIAN LAW RELATING TO EXTORTION.
1. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Matro-nianus, Duke and
Governor of Sardinia.
In order that the penalty inflicted upon one person may strike many others with
fear, We order that a duke who has been guilty of extortion shall be sent,
under a sufficient guard, into the province which he plundered, and be
compelled against his will to pay not only fourfold the value of what he
himself extorted or took from the inhabitants of Our province, but also of
anything which the members of his household and his soldiers and attendants may
have obtained in this manner.
Given at Constantinople, on the day before the Idesof June, during the
Consulate of Antoninus and Syagrius, 382.
2. The Same Emperors to Florus, Praetorian Prefect.
All judges are notified that, so far as their own extortions are concerned, the
pecuniary penalties imposed cannot only be collected from them, but also from
their heirs.
Given on the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of Antoninus and
Syagrius, 382.
3. The Same Emperors to Marcellinus.
All magistrates and judges are hereby notified that they must keep their hands
off of the money and estates belonging to litigants, and not think that the
controversies of others may be a source of plunder for themselves, for judges
and traders in private litigation are liable to the penalties prescribed by the
laws.
Given at Milan, on the day before the Nonesof April, during the Consulate of
Merobaudus, Consul for the second time, and Saturninus, 383.
4. The Same Emperors and Arcadius, Edict Addressed to the Inhabitants of the
Provinces.
We order, and We urge that if any public official, decurion, landlord, and
finally any vassal or person of any rank whatever, should have been, in any
way, harassed by a judge, or if anyone should know
that a judicial decree was obtained by the use of money, or that a penalty was
remitted through a reward, or with the hope of gain, or where anyone can
afterwards establish the dishonesty of a judge in any case, he must denounce
him, and furnish evidence in support of his accusation, either during his
administration, or after he has relinquished his office; and, if he should
prove the crime, he shall be honored and glorified for having done so.
Given at Constantinople, on the tenth of the Kalendsof July, during the
Consulate of the Noble Prince Honorius, and Evodius, 386.
5. The Emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius to Sever-inus, Count of
Private Affairs.
Let every Attorney of the Crown, Steward of the Royal Household, secretary,
collector, or tenant of anyone, who remembers that the Count of Our Private
Affairs has extorted money from him, and he to whom he paid it has retired from
office, demand what he paid before Your Excellency, within the term of one
year, and whatever he refunds shall be credited on his account.
When, however, the prescribed time has elapsed from the date of his laying
aside his office, no accusation of this kind shall be heard, but We decree that
the Attorneys themselves, the Stewards, the tenants, the secretaries, and the
collectors aforesaid shall be held liable for payment.
Given at Milan, on the day before the Nonesof June, during the Consulate of
Valentinian, Consul for the fourth time, and Neoterius, 290.
6. The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian to Florentinus, Prsetorian Prefect.
We order that men shall be selected for the government of provinces whose lives
are honorable, and who are not attracted to the office by ambition or the
desire for gain, but who are deemed worthy of promotion by Your Excellency, so
that those who are chosen for the place by yourself or by Us, having been
sworn, may state that they have not given anything in order to obtain the
office to which they have been appointed, and that they will never in the
future give anything, either themselves, or by other persons for that purpose,
in violation of the law, and of their oath, nor enter into an agreement of this
kind, by way of a sale or donation, or under any other pretext.
They should also swear that, with the exception of their salaries, they will
not accept anything whatever during their administration, or after they have
relinquished their office, in consideration of any favor which they may bestow
during their term, and which they should grant without reward.
And although We believe that no one, by violating his oath, will forget the
fear of God, and prefer some present advantage to his own salvation, still, in
order that the danger of punishment may be added to the fear of Divine
retribution, We grant to all persons the right of accusation, as of a public
crime, where any official dares to
disregard the oath which he has taken, and this applies not only to him who
received the presents but also to him who gave them; and anyone convicted of
this crime shall be fined quadruple the value of what was given or received.1
Given at Constantinople, on the sixth of the Kalendsof December during the
Consulate of Theodosius, Consul for the seventeenth time and Festus, 439.

* TITLE XXVIII. CONCERNING THE CRIME OF EMBEZZLEMENT.
1. The Emperors Honorius and, Theodosius to Rufinus, Prsetorian Prefect.
Judges who misappropriate public money during their administration incur the
penalty imposed by the Lex Juliarelating to embezzlement, and We order that
they shall suffer capital punishment, and that those shall be subjected to the
same penalty who are guilty of complicity with them, or who knowingly received
the property misappropriated by them.
Given at Constantinople, on the fifth of the Nonesof March, during the
Consulate of Honorius, Consul for the tenth time, and Theodosius, Consul for
the sixth time, 415.

* TITLE XXXXIIXX..CONCERNING THE CRIME OF SACRILEGE.
1. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Eutro-pius, Prsetorian
Prefect.
Those who fail to observe, or violate the sanctity of the Divine Law and offend
either through ignorance or neglect, commit sacrilege.
Given at Thessalonica, on the third of the Kalendsof March, during the
Consulate of Gratian, Consul for the fifth time, and Theodosius, 380.
2. This Law is not Authentic.
3. The Same Emperors to Symmachus, Prefect of the City.
The conduct of the Emperor should not be discussed, for it is the same as
sacrilege to doubt whether he whom the sovereign selects for an office is
worthy or not.
Given at Milan, on the fifth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of
Richomer and Clearchus, 384.
1 This offence has been defined as follows: "Extortio est crimen quando quis
colore offcii extorquet quod non est debitum, vel supra debitum, vel ante
tempus quod est debitum."—ED.
4. The Same Emperors and Arcadius to Eutropius, Prsetorian Prefect.
Let no one think that he who desires to receive and administer an office, in
the same province in which he is both an inhabitant and a citizen, is not
guilty of sacrilege, unless the Emperor himself has voluntarily granted someone
this privilege by a rescript.1
Given on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of
Arcadius and Bauto, 385.



* TITLE XXX.
CONCERNING SEDITIOUS PERSONS, AND THOSE WHO DARE TO ASSEMBLE THE PEOPLE AGAINST
THE GOVERNMENT.

1. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Floren-tius,
Augustal Prsetorian Prefect.
If anyone should attempt to stir up the populace contrary to the plain
provisions of the law enacted on this subject, and resist the public
authorities, he shall be subjected to the severest punishment.  Given
at Constantinople, on the thirteenth of the Kalendsof January, during
the Consulate of Richomer and Clearchus, 384.

2. The Emperor Leo to Erythrius, Prsetorian Prefect.
No seditious speeches shall be made with tumultuous clamor in any city or
elsewhere, nor shall any offensive words be uttered against any official of the
government; and those who make such speeches and incite such tumults are hereby
notified that they will, under no circumstances, obtain anything which they
demand, but that, on the other hand, they will be liable to the penalties which
the ancient laws provide against the authors of seditions and tumults.
Given at Constantinople, on the second of the Nonesof March, during the
Consulate of Leo, Consul for the sixth time, 474.

* TITLE XXXI.
WHEN A CIVIL ACTION CANNOT BE BROUGHT AT THE
SAME TIME ALONG WITH A CRIMINAL PROSECUTION, AND
WHETHER BOTH PROCEEDINGS CAN BE INSTITUTED BY
THE SAME PERSON.
1. The Emperors Valens, Gratian, and Valentinian to Antony, Prsetorian Prefect.
It has been generally laid down by a majority of jurists that whenever both a
criminal and a civil action will lie in a private matter, both of them can be
brought, no matter which may first be instituted; and when the civil action has
not been filed, the criminal one can be,
1 A person guilty of sacrilege was considered by the Romans as worse than a
thief. "Sacrilegus omnium prsedonum cupiditatem et scelera superat."—ED.
and vice versa.Hence, if anyone has been forcibly dispossessed of property, and
for the purpose of recovering it has made use of the interdict Unde vi,it is
still not forbidden to bring a criminal accusation under the Julian Law
relating to public violence. And where a will has been suppressed, and
proceedings have been begun under the edict providing for its production, a
criminal prosecution is authorized by the Cornelian Law having reference to
wills.
When a freedman alleges that he is freeborn, he can be prosecuted civilly on
account of the services due to his patron, as well as criminally under the
Viscellian Law. Under this head also is classed the action of theft, as well as
that created by the Fabian Law.
There are many other instances which cannot be enumerated here : where when one
action is brought first, it is lawful to try the case again by having recourse
to another. According to this statement of the law, there is no doubt that the
crime of forgery, which has already been made the subject of a civil action,
can also be prosecuted criminally.
Given on the day before the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of Valens,
Consul for the sixth time, and Valentinian, Consul for the second time, 378.

* TITLE XXXII. CONCERNING THE CRIME OP PLUNDERING AN ESTATE.
1. The Emperors S&verus and Antoninus to Euphrata.
You cannot prosecute your co-heir for the crime of plundering the estate when
you acknowledged that, after having examined the property in the common chest,
the keys of the same were delivered to him. When a demand is made to produce
the property in court, he cannot be compelled to adjust his accounts, for after
the property for which the demand was made has been produced, the decision of
the controversy should be left to the proper judges.
Published on the twelfth of the Kalendsof May, during the second Consulate of
Antoninus and Geta, 206.
2. The Emperor Antoninus to Primus.
You are not prevented from prosecuting your step-father for the crime of
plundering the estate, before the Governor of the province.
Published on the seventh of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of
Lsetus, Consul for the second time, and Cerealis, 216.
_^
3. The Same Emperor to Helena.
If you have entered on the estate of your grandfather, you will not be
prevented from prosecuting your step-mother for the crime of plundering the
estate.
Published on the third of the Nonesof January, during the Consulate of Sabinus,
and Anulinus, 217.
4. The Emperor Gordian to Bassus.
The heirs of a deceased husband cannot prosecute his widow for the crime of
plundering his estate (as she is, both humanly and divinely speaking, the
partner of her husband). Therefore you can sue for the property, which you
allege she has abstracted, by bringing the proper action in rem;or, if she has
been guilty of fraud in order to avoid having possession of the chattels, you
can compel her to produce them, and she cannot acquire the ownership of the
income of any property which she retained in bad faith, for although she is not
liable to prosecution for the crime of plundering the estate, there is no doubt
whatever that the income from the same can be recovered by a suit if it is in
existence, and if it has been consumed, a personal action may be brought for
its value.
Published on the sixth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Atticus
and Praetextatus, 243.
5. The Emperor Philip and the Csesar Philip to Simplicius.
Legatees, even when they were the freedmen of the deceased, cannot be deprived
of the benefit of their legacies, under the pretext that the estate has been
plundered, especially when the case has not been heard.
Published on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof February, during the Consulate of
Philip and Titian, 246.
6. The Same Emperor and Csesar to Basilia.
It is a well-settled rule of law that the crime of plundering an estate can be
prosecuted, even where a civil action for the same cause has failed.
Published on the tenth of the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of
^milianus and Aquilinus, 250.

* TITLE XXXIII. CONCERNING PROPERTY CARRIED OFF BY VIOLENCE.
1. The Emperor Gordian to Valerius.
It is an established principle of law that an action brought for the recovery
of property carried away by violence, and which includes a penalty, has
reference rather to property which is movable and can move itself than to land
illegally occupied.
Published on the Kalendsof March, during the Consulate of Atticus and
Praetextatus, 243.
2. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to Longinus.
If the heir of the donor forcibly deprived you of the movable property, whose
ownership you acquired by a legal donation, you have the right to bring suit
for quadruple damages on the ground of property taken by violence, within a
year; and, after that time, you will not be prevented from bringing an action
for simple damages.
Published on the seventh of ... May, during the Consulate of Secularus and
Donatus, 261.
3. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Csesars, to Evelpistus.
It is settled that a creditor who forcibly removes property which has been
pledged to him does not perform a lawful act, but commits a crime, and there is
no doubt that he can be sued for quadruple damages on the ground of having
carried away the property by violence within the available year, or for simple
damages after the year has expired.
Ordered at Sirmium, on the seventh of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of the above-mentioned Emperors.
4. The Same Emperors and Ciesars to Attains.
With reference to property which a slave belonging to another is said to have,
removed by violence, without the knowledge of his master, the latter can be
sued for quadruple damages in a noxal action on this ground before a competent
court within a year, and, after that time, an action for simple damages can be
brought against him.
Ordered at Heraclia, on the second of the Kalendsof May, under the Consulate of
the above-mentioned Emperors.
5. The Same Emperors and C&sars to Domna.
Whether you think that you should proceed against your stepmother in an action
based on voluntary agency, or in one for the forcible removal of property, by
means of which quadruple damages can be recovered within the available year,
and similar damages afterwards; you can bring your suit before the Governor.
Ordered at Philippopolis, on the sixth of the Nonesof July, during the
Consulate of the above-mentioned Emperors.

* TITLE XXXIV. CONCERNING THE CRIME OP SWINDLING.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Alexander.
You acknowledge that you have committed a dishonorable and criminal act by
having pledged the same property to several persons, and that, when contracting
the last obligation, you concealed the fact that the said property was already
encumbered to others. You will provide for your security, and avoid prosecution
for crime, if you pay your debts to all your creditors.
Published on the fifth of the Idesof February, during the Consulate of
Pompeianus and Pelignus, 232.
2. The Emperor Gordian to Valens.
If your father gave you a donation, and, at the time when you were emancipated,
transferred to you by delivery the ownership of the said property, and
afterwards hypothecated it to his creditor as his
own, without your consent, he does not prejudice your rights, nor can he be
prosecuted for the crime of swindling, because of knowingly encumbering to his
creditor as his own, and without your consent, property which he knew belonged
to another.
Published on the second of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of
Gordian and Aviola, 240.
3. The Same Emperor to Hadrian.
Swindling should not be included among public crimes. Published on the Idesof
April, during the Consulate of Atticus and Prsetextatus, 243.
4. The Emperor Philip to Eutropius.
Advantage cannot be taken of the ignorance of a creditor without incurring the
risk of punishment, where property encumbered to him has already been legally
pledged or hypothecated to another; for fraudulent acts of this description
should be regarded as unusual offences, and it has been repeatedly stated in
rescripts that swindling must be severely punished. Hence your debtor either
attempted to take advantage of your ignorance, or, if the obligation was
legally contracted, he fraudulently tried to deprive you of your right by
conniving with a person for this purpose, whom he pretended to have a prior
lien on the property pledged; and you can appear before the court having
jurisdiction which will render a decision in conformity with law and equity.
Published on the sixth of the Idesof May, during the Consulate of Peregrinus
and .^Emilianus, 245.

* TITLE XXXV. CONCERNING INJURIES.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Syrus.
It is not lawful to injure the slaves of others.
Published on the eleventh of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Alexander.
2. The Same Emperor to Clavus.
The action for injury will lie in your favor for two reasons: first, because a
husband is understood to have some regard for his wife's reputation for
chastity; and second, because a father is considered to sustain damage when the
character of his daughter is assailed.
Published on the day before the Idesof May, during the Consulate of Agricola
and Clement, 231.
3. The Emperor Gordian to Donatus.
If you did not denounce anyone, you should have no fear that your reputation
has been damaged, because certain persons, with the intention of injuring you,
have called you an informer; and, further-
more, you can bring an action for injury in the usual way against those who are
ascertained to have done anything -for the purpose of reflecting upon your
character.
Published on the second of the Idesof July, during the Consulate of Gordian and
Aviola, 240.
4. The Emperors Valerian, Gallienus, and the Csesar Valerian to Vindius.
It is perfectly clear that an atrocious injury has been committed, if at the
time when this was done you were in the exercise of your duty as priest, and
wore the habit and the ornaments of your profession; and therefore you can
bring a criminal prosecution in order to obtain redress.
Published on the second of . . . , during the Consulate of Mmili-anus and
Bassus, 260.
5. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian, and the Cazsars, to Victorinus.
If you can prove that you did not intentionally make use of any abusive
expression, the truth of this fact will protect you from an accusation of
slander. If, however, during a quarrel, and while inflamed with anger, you
accused someone of homicide, and twelve months have elapsed since that time, as
an action for injury committed is barred by prescription after the expiration
of a year, you cannot be sued on that ground.
Published on the sixth of the Idesof July, during the Consulate of Diocletian,
Consul for the fourth time, and Maximian, Consul for the third time, 290.
6. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Flavianus.
As the justice of the law does not permit patrons to commit injuries against
their freedmen, and you state that the heirs of your patron have injured one
who received his freedom from the defunct, the Governor of the province will
see that the insults of the heirs cease.
Published on the Idesof July, during the Consulate of Diocletian, Consul for
the fourth time, and Maximian, Consul for the third time, 290. j
7. The Same Emperors and Caesars to Potentianus.
The commission of injury gives rise to a private action, and not to a criminal
prosecution.
Ordered at Sirmium, on the Idesof February, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.
8. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Martian.
It is established that a master can bring suit for an atrocious injury suffered
by his slave, in accordance with the terms of the Perpetual Edict, by which it
is plainly stated that an action for damages will lie.
Ordered on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of the
above-mentioned Emperors.
9. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Nonna.
There is no doubt that persons who, for the purpose of rendering them infamous,
have stated that the children of a certain individual were slaves, can be sued
in an action of injury.
Ordered at Nicomedia, on the sixth of the Kalendsof December, during the
Consulate of the above-mentioned Emperors.
10. The Same Emperors and Csssars to Paulus.
If Zenodorus (for the purpose of defaming her) said that your grandmother was a
female slave, belonging to the City of the Coman-.ensians, and did nothing
more, an action for injury committed can immediately be brought against him.
If, however, he persists in his assertion, you have the right to defend
yourself in court, and then, if your grandmother should not be decided to be a
slave, it is settled that you can bring your suit*
Ordered at Nicomedia, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of the Csesars.
11. The Emperor Zeno to Alexander, a Man of Illustrious Rank.
When the criminal action for the commission of injury which the ancient legal
authorities included among private offences is brought by persons of
illustrious rank, whether they hold any office or not, or by their wives, their
sons, or their daughters (of course, during .the lifetime of their fathers or
husbands), or if it should be brought against any person of this description,
We decree that the said persons shall file their complaints in writing, and
solemnly observe all the other legal formalities which are usually complied
with in such cases. The illustrious accuser or defendant, or his wife, or
children of either sex shall, during the lifetime of their parents, have the
right to defend themselves, or file the accusation in a criminal case for
injury in any court having jurisdiction, by an attorney; and the judge shall
render his decision according to law against the party who appointed the
attorney, even if he himself was not present in court, but tried the case by
his attorney, provided, however, that no one else shall be so bold as to claim
this privilege for himself, or to ask Us to grant it; but with respect to
others, the practice of the courts which has been observed up to the present
time shall prevail hereafter.
Given at Constantinople, on the fifth of the Nonesof November, during the
Consulate of Illus, 478.

* TITLE XXXVI. CONCERNING DEFAMATORY LIBELS.
1. Edict of the Emperors Valentinian and Valens.If anyone should find a
defamatory libel in a house, in a public place, or anywhere else, without
knowing who placed it there, he must
either tear it up before anyone else finds it, or not mention to anyone that he
has done so. If, however, he should not immediately tear up, or burn the paper,
but should show it to others, he is notified that he will be liable to the
punishment of death as the author.
Where anyone having a view to his own duty or to the preservation of the public
safety mentions the name of the culprit, and states with his own mouth what he
thought reprehensible in the libel aforesaid, let him be under no
apprehensions, for if the truth should be established by his assertions, he
will be entitled to the greatest praise, as well as to a reward from Us. If,
however, he should not be able to prove the truth of his statements, he shall
be punished with death.1
A libel of this kind does not injure the reputation of another.
1 The famosus libellusof Roman jurisprudence belonged to the class of injuries,
Aword of indefinite signification referring to acts implying malice and having
a direct tendency to damage someone either in person or reputation. An injury
might be actual, such as assault and battery; or verbal, as slanderous
expressions, bringing their object into public contempt. It, in.many respects,
corresponds to our "tort," and was defined by the ancient authorities, in
general terms, as everything illegally done: "Omne quod non jure fit."
The Laws of the Twelve Tables authorized the enforcement of the Lex Talionisin
the case of serious injury, where it was possible; and when it was
comparatively slight, established a regular schedule of indemnities, the least
of which was twenty-five asses. (LegesXII TabularumVII, VII.) This, however,
was ultimately abrogated by the equitable jurisdiction of the Praetor, who
permitted a civil or criminal action for damages to be instituted, the amount
of which was fixed by the plaintiff himself, subject to revision by the court,
who, if he thought best, could either allow or diminish it. "Index uel tanti
condemnat quanti nos xstimauerimus, uel minoris, prout ei uisum fuerit."
It was essential for malice to be proved in an action for slander or libel, and
if the truth of the statements which formed the basis of the suit could be
proved by the defendant, he was permitted to do so.
Many of the verses and inscriptions, known as graffiti,as well as the
caricatures, left by the scribbling populace of Roman cities upon the walls of
public buildings for the amusement and edification of posterity, although often
of an undoubtedly libelous character, were never removed by the authorities,
who seem to have manifested a singular indifference towards insults and
defamation when published in this manner. These were the precursors of the
pasquinades of more recent times.
No suit would lie where the alleged injury was not intentional, was the result
of a mistake, or originated in an act of pleasantry. But even a mere gesture,
if obviously designed to cast opprobrium or insult upon anyone, was actionable,
although no words whatever may have accompanied it. Under the Lex Cornelia, de
injuriis,the injured person could proceed both civilly and criminally where the
act complained of was of a peculiarly violent or atrocious character. The right
of action De injuriawas transmitted to heirs, where joinder of issue had taken
place before the death of the plaintiff.
A gesture of contempt, without sufficient cause, incurred severe retribution
among the Babylonians. "If a man point the finger at a priestess or the wife of
another and cannot justify it, they shall draw that man before the judge and
they shall brand his forehead." (The Code of Hammurabi, Sec. 127.)
That species of Lex Talioniswhich deprived a man of the member with which he
committed the offence was a popular and effective penalty in antiquity.
The Hindus punished abuse of a magistrate with amputation of the tongue,
confiscation of property, and banishment. In all other cases of slander a fine
was imposed, which varied with the rank and caste of the offender. (Gentoo Code
XV. I, II.)
Given at Constantinople, on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof March, during the
Consulate of Valentinian and Valens, 363.

* TITLE XXXVII. CONCERNING CATTLE THIEVES.
1. The Emperors Honorius and Arcadius to Pasiphilus.
The accusation of a cattle thief not only can be made in writing, but can also
be instituted without that formality.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of Olybrius
and Promotus, 395.
With the Saxons, the burden of proof, showing damage to property, rested on the
complainant, and injury to reputation was not taken into account. "And he who
shall accuse another wrongfully, so that he, either in money or in prosperity,
be the worse, if then the other can disprove that which anyone would charge to
him, be he liable in his tongue, unless he make him compensation with his
'wer.' " (Ancient Laws and Institutes of England; The Laws of King Edgar II,
4.)
Libel, as a specific offence, is not recognized by Mohammedans, and slander is
limited to direct accusations, or insinuations relating to sexual misconduct,
such as adultery, promiscuous illicit intercourse, and, under certain
restrictions, illegitimacy. (The Hedaya II, VII, V.)
While the law of libel was known to the early English legal writers, the
offence was not considered one of a serious nature, but is designated a
misdemeanor. Bracton places it among minora et leviora crimina,but says little
or nothing about this breach of the law, or its punishment. It was not until
the reign of Charles I that prosecutions for it assumed a definite form, and
they were principally directed against those who, with evidently malicious
intent, had attacked the government, the King, or his ministers. Such cases
were tried in the Star Chamber, and involved imprisonment, fine, exposure in
the pillory, and loss of ears. (VideStephen, A History of the Criminal Law of
England II, XXIV, Page 305.)
The present English law, based on the Libel Acts, pays special attention to
seditious libels, and such as are designed or published with a view to
extortion. Malicious defamatory libels are punished by a fine to be fixed by
the court, or by imprisonment not to exceed one year. (VideStephen,
Commentaries of the Laws of England IV, IV, IV, 11.)
Criminal libel is thus defined by American jurists. "A defamatory libel is
matter published without legal justification or excuse, the effect of which is
to insult the person of whom it is published, or which is calculated to injure
the reputation of any person by exposing him to hatred, contempt, or ridicule."
(Wharton, Criminal Law, Sec. 1915.) Anything which, when made the ground of a
civil action, would be considered libelous without demanding special damage is
indictable, as are also blasphemy, or obscene pictures or writings. Mere
observation by a third party is sufficient to constitute publication. While at
Common Law truth was not a justification, and could not be set up as a defence,
the rule is now different both in England and the United States. "The
publication of a libel is not a misdemeanor if the defamatory matter is true,
and if the publisher can show that it was for the public benefit that such
matter should be published." (Ibid.,Sec. 1968.) Where, however, malice exists,
this principle is not applicable. (Videalso Ibid.,Secs. 1919, 1926, 1927,
1940.)
Libelous or slanderous statements published against the sovereign or officials
of the government are generally, in the countries of continental Europe,
classed as instances of lese majesty,and punished accordingly. When a private
person is the object of such attacks, the penalty is, of course, not nearly so
severe.—ED.

* TITLE XXXVIII.
CONCERNING THE PROHIBITION OF DAMAGING THE LEVEES OF THE NILE.
1. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Anthemius, Praetorian Prefect.
If anyone should hereafter, contrary to the ancient practice observed
throughout Egypt, seize land left by the overflow of the Nile, within twelve
cubits from the bank of the said river, in violation of the peculiar and
ancient customs of that country, he shall be burned to death in the place in
which he displayed his want of reverence for antiquity, and, to a certain
extent, attacked the security of the Empire itself. His accomplices and
companions shall be sentenced to deportation, and without ever being granted
permission to obtain pardon, or recover either their citizenship, their rank or
their property.
Given at Constantinople, on the tenth of the Kalendsof October, during the
Consulate of Honorius, Consul for the eighth time, and Theodosius, Consul for
the third time, 409.

* TITLE XXXIX.
CONCERNING THOSE WHO CONCEAL ROBBERS OR OTHER CRIMINALS.
1. The Emperors Vcdentinian, Valens, and Gratian to the Vicegerent Simplicius.
Those who conceal persons guilty of crime must expect the same penalty, to
which they have rendered themselves liable by having associated with them, and
anyone who knowingly harbors robbers, and neglects to give them up to justice,
shall, in the discretion of the judge, be punished corporeally, or by a
pecuniary fine, according to his rank.
Published at Rome, on the tenth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of
Gratian, Consul for the third time, and Equitius, 374.
2. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Palladius, Pras-torian Prefect.
When any robbers or other malefactors reside or conceal themselves on the land
of another, the owner of the property (if he is present) or his agents (if he
is absent), or the persons having the control of the same, are obliged to
voluntarily deliver up the said criminals; and if they knowingly should not do
so of their own accord, they shall be notified by the civil authorities to
surrender those who are sought, in order that they may be tried and punished
according to the nature of their offences.
Where, however, the owners of the land or their agents, or those having charge
of the same, do not promptly give them up, then the Governor of the province,
having been applied to, must take all legal measures to arrest them. When a
sufficient force cannot be obtained
to do this, on account of their number, and the above-mentioned malefactors
resist the officers of the law, or otherwise manage to avoid arrest, then the
judge of the province, mindful of his responsibility, shall ask assistance from
the tribune or commanders of the soldiers who are in the neighborhood, in order
that the accused persons, having been seized by the soldiers, may be placed in
the hands of the law, without damage or injury to anyone, and, after
conviction, may undergo suitable penalties.
The judge, however, should not forget that if he requests the aid of soldiers
against one who is innocent, or for any motive than the trial of robbers or
other dangerous persons, or subjects the people of the province to unnecessary
expense, he will be liable to the severest punishment which Your Highness may
determine to be appropriate. If the tribunes, commanders, or other officers,
who are in the neighborhood, after having been notified by the judge, should
refuse to afford assistance, or if any injuries should be inflicted by the
soldiers themselves upon the inhabitants of the provinces, they must make good
all losses and damages, and be punished with the greatest severity besides, in
accordance with the judgment of the illustrious commander-in-chief.
The owners of the land aforesaid, or their agents, or whoever has charge of the
same, shall not go unpunished, if, being present, and aware of the facts, they
do not voluntarily surrender the guilty parties; or, if having been notified,
they delay to produce them; but the proprietor of the land shall be deprived of
his ownership of it, and the agent or superintendent shall be sentenced to
perpetual exile.
When the agents themselves, the owner, or the superintendents of the land,
acknowledge that they are unable to control the multitude of peasants and
criminals aforesaid, and make this statement openly in the tribunal of the
province, the Governor shall cause military aid to be furnished by the tribune
or the other officers, if he should ascertain that the power of the civil
authorities is not sufficient; but when, after the production of the alleged
culprits, it becomes evident that they are innocent, and have committed no
crime, their accuser will be compelled to suffer the punishment inflicted upon
calumniators, for it establishes a bad precedent to seek for robbers, and by
doing so place innocent persons in jeopardy.
Given at Constantinople, on the twelfth of the Kalendsof January, during the
Consulate of Marinianus, and Asclepiodotus, 423.

* TITLE XL. CONCERNING THE NOTIFICATION OF ACCUSED PERSONS.
1. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to Rusticus.
When anyone, who is absent, is charged with serious crimes, sentence is not
usually pronounced against him at once, but he is notified to appear, not for
the purpose of being punished, but that an opportunity may be afforded him to
clear himself, provided he can do so.
If, after having been notified, he should return within a year and clear
himself of the crime, he shall receive his property which has been sealed by
order of court. When, however, he returns within the prescribed time after
having been notified, and dies before establishing his innocence, he will
transmit his property to his heirs.
Given at . . . , during the Consulate of Tuscus and Bassus, 212.
2. The Emperor Constantine to Jamiarius.
Anyone who refuses to appear in court within a year from the time that he was
charged with a crime shall have his property confiscated to the Treasury, and
if he should afterwards be found and convicted, he must be given a more severe
sentence, and even if he should prove his innocence by clear and satisfactory
evidence, his property will, nevertheless, remain in possession of the
Treasury.
Given on the Idesof January, and adopted at Corinth, on the fifth of the
Kalendsof August, during the Consulate of Constantine, Consul for the fifth
time, and the Caesar Licinius, 319.
3. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Palladius, Prsetorian Prefect.
In cases involving the payment of money, the Edict promulgated against a person
who remains concealed does not affect his reputation, but a criminal proceeding
brings such censure under the law that he who is accused not only cannot
transfer his estate, but his good name is also injured.
Given at Ravenna, on the seventh of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of
Eustachius and Agricola, 421.

* TITLE XLI. CONCERNING TORTURE.
1. The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Antiana.
Slaves should not be subjected to torture against their masters except in cases
of adultery, accusations of fraud having reference to taxation, and the crime
of high treason, which involves the safety of the Emperor. So far as other
offences are concerned, although judges should not formulate hurriedly a
decision based on testimony given by a slave against his master, still, if the
truth is established by other testimony, an exception cannot be pleaded. It is,
however, clear that, in pecuniary cases, slaves should be interrogated against
their masters, where other evidence is lacking.
Published on the Kalendsof January, during the Consulate of Fuscus, Consul for
the second time, and Dexter, 197.
2. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Catullus.
It is unusual, and furnishes a bad precedent, for slaves to be heard against
their guardians, or the mother of their master, unless the administration of
the guardianship is involved.
Published on the third of the Idesof September, during the Consulate of Chilo
and Libo, 205.
3. The Emperor Antoninus When Deciding a Case, Said:Slaves belonging to another
should first be interrogated under torture, when there is sufficient evidence
that a crime of such atrocity has been perpetrated; and the woman herself may
afterwards be put to the question, for it is not inhuman for her to be tortured
who destroyed her husband by poison.
Published on the seventh of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate of
Sabinus and Anulinus, 217.
4. Extract from a Rescript of the Emperor Antoninus.
As too much reliance should not be placed on the statements of criminals who,
having been convicted, allege that those by whom they were arrested and kept in
custody are their accomplices, so, if it is clearly proved that they only
divulged the crime committed in common for the purpose of avoiding the penalty,
they shall not escape public
punishment.
Published on the fifth of the Kalendsof April, during the Consulate
of Sabinus and Anulinus, 217.
5. The Emperor Alexander to Respectus.
Slaves who have obtained their freedom by the last will of a testator should
not be indiscriminately subjected to torture, even where his death should be
avenged.
Published on the sixth of the Idesof March, during the Consulate of Sabinus and
Venustus, 241.
6. The Emperor Gordian to Herodian.
It was long since decided that slaves or freedmen ought not to be tortured in
cases having reference to the domestic affairs of their owners, or patrons, as
what might be obtained by their confessions would not have the force of truth
either for or against them, in capital or pecuniary cases.
Published on the seventh of the Idesof May, during the Consulate
of Sabinus and Venustus, 241.
7. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Urbana.
If the slaves have been proved without doubt to belong to you, We do not permit
them to be put to torture, even though you suggest that this be done; and, so
far from doing so, We are unwilling that they should be compelled to violate
their fidelity to their mistress, even against your consent.
Published on the Kalendsof November, during the Consulate of Maximus, Consul
for the second time, and Aquilinus, 286.
8. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Sallust, Governor.We do not permit soldiers
to be subjected to torture, or to the penalties imposed upon plebeians in
criminal cases, even when it
appears that they have been dismissed from the service without the privileges
of veterans, with the exception of those who have been dishonorably discharged.
This rule shall also be observed with reference to the sons of soldiers and
veterans.
In the prosecution of public crimes, judges should not begin the investigation
by resorting to torture, but should first avail themselves of all accessible
and probable evidence. If, after having obtained information relative to the
crime, they think that torture should be applied for the purpose of
ascertaining the truth, they only ought to resort to it where the rank of the
persons involved justifies such a course; for, by the terms of this law, all
the inhabitants of the provinces have a right to the benefit of the natural
benevolence which We entertain for them.
Without date or designation of Consulate.
9. The Same Emperors and Csssars to Our Beloved Governor of Syria.
In the investigation of the question of free birth, every form of interrogation
and torture should be resorted to in order that persons of low and debased
origin may not venture to claim for themselves a position among those who are
distinguished and freeborn, and that the succession to which the latter are
entitled may not through a fraudulent assumption be denied to them.
Given on the sixth of the Idesof May, during the Consulate of Diocletian,
Consul for the fourth time, and Maximian, Consul for the third time, 290.
10. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Ptolmseus.
As you allege that the will is forged, the slaves forming part of the estate
may, under the Constitutions of the Emperors, be put to torture, even though
they were granted freedom by the person who asserts that he is the heir.
Published on the sixth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Diocletian, Consul for the fourth time, and Maximian, Consul for the third
time, 290.
11. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Boethus.
It was decided by the Divine Marcus that the descendants of men who are
designated "Most Eminent and most Perfect," to the degree of great-
grandchildren, shall not be subject either to the penalties or the tortures
inflicted upon plebeians, if no stigma of violated honor attached to those of a
nearer degree, through whom this privilege was transmitted to their
descendants.
The learned jurist Domitius Ulpianus, in his works treating of public law,
states for the knowledge and information of future ages that this rule shall
also be observed with reference to decurions and their children.
Published on the fifth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Diocletian, Consul for the fourth time, and Maximian, Consul for the third
time, 291.
12. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Asper.
Whenever the ownership of slaves is involved, and the truth cannot be
ascertained by other evidence, eminent legal authorities hold that the slaves
themselves can be interrogated under torture.
Published at Sirmium, on the third of the Idesof May, during the Consulate of
Tiberianus and Dio.
13. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Philippa.
It can be of no advantage to you for the slaves forming part of the estate to
be tortured in the case in question, as the ownership of the same is not in
dispute; for where it is uncertain who is entitled to it, it is but reasonable
that, in order to ascertain the truth, the slaves belonging to the estate
should be subjected to torture; but, as you assert that the slave is common
property, you should entertain no doubt that half of him belongs to the person
against whom you desire the said slave to be interrogated. This fact presents
an obstacle to the application of torture, as slaves of two joint-owners cannot
be put to the question and interrogated against either of them, except where
one is said to have killed the other.
Ordered at Heraclia, on the third of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of
the above-mentioned Emperors.
14. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Constantine.
It is settled that slaves cannot be tortured any more in favor of their
masters, to whom they now belong, than in favor of those who formerly owned
them.
Ordered on the eighth of the Idesof April, during the Consulate
of the Csesars.
15. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Maximus.
There is no doubt that slaves can be put to torture on account of acts
committed by them, not only in criminal cases, but also in those involving the
payment of money, where property is entrusted to them for deposit or loan, or
for other purposes authorized by law.
Ordered on the fifth of the Idesof April, during the Consulate of the Csesars.
16. The Emperors Valentinian, Valens, and Gratian to Antonius, Prsetorian
Prefect of the Gauls.
We desire decurions to be absolutely exempt from the suffering inflicted by
instruments of torture, not only with reference to the debts of others, but
also on account of their own. If any magistrate should attempt to insult the
Order of Decurions in this manner, he shall be put to death. This severe
proceeding shall only be permitted in the case of persons belonging to this
municipal order, who are accused of high treason, and who are either
accomplices or principals in this
infamous crime.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof October, during the Con-pulate of
Valens, Consul for the fifth time, and Valentinian, 376.
17. The Emperors Arcadiiis and Honorius to Messala, Prsetorian Prefect.
Let every magistrate understand that he cannot, when inflamed with resentment,
deviate from the course of justice; nor, if influenced by bribery, inflict
corporeal injury by torturing persons who are innocent, or Of exalted rank; as
the devotion manifested by such persons through long service and arduous labors
entitles them to this privilege.
The same rule applies where anyone has retired from the office of decurion,
for, on account of his former, position, he must not be subjected to torture.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate of
Theodore, 299.
18. The Emperor Justinian to Demosthenes, Prsetorian Prefect.
So far as the torture of slaves belonging to an estate is concerned, We order
that, in accordance with former laws and constitutions, no distinction shall be
made, whether a question has arisen among the heirs as to the title to the
entire estate, or only to a portion of the same, or to both; for the slaves can
only be interrogated concerning certain property of the estate, and those alone
shall be liable to torture who had charge of its administration, whether they
were left in servitude, or were directed to obtain their freedom by the last
will of the testator, so that any property belonging to the estate which may
have been concealed can be discovered. Before this is done, however, he who
demands the torture of the slaves must take the oath prescribed by Us in such
cases.
Given on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof October, at Chalcedon, during the
Consulate of Decius, 529.

* TITLE XLII. CONCERNING ABOLITION^
1. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Paterna.
If the Governor of the province should ascertain that the abolition obtained by
the accused includes all the crimes with which he was
1 Abolitio,at Civil Law, in some respects, resembled the nolle prosequiof
modern times. It was the only means by which the progress of a criminal
proceeding could be arrested, and was granted upon application, either by the
court, the Senate, or the Emperor. The judge had power to dispose of a case in
this way, where the prosecutor was able to show good cause for retirement, or
any of the requisite legal formalities had not been observed. A general
abolitiowas equivalent to an amnesty, which, however, was not final, as the
accuser could renew the prosecution within thirty days, if he so desired.
Either the accuser or the defendant could apply for an abolitio,but the
acquiescence of the latter was essential in every instance.
This proceeding was not unknown to the early English law, as by Stat. 25, Hen.
Vill, c. 21, the king or the judges could authorize the accuser to abandon the
further prosecution of a criminal offence.—ED.
charged, his authority will be interposed to prevent what has once been
terminated from being renewed. Although prosecution of the crime may have
ceased on account of the above-mentioned abolition, still the latter can be
revoked by the same person at whose request it was obtained.
Published on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Diocletian, Consul for the third time, and Maximian, 287.
2. The Emperor Constantine to Januarius, Prsetorian Prefect.
Abolition ought to be requested in the presence of both parties in a case where
a competent judge, and not the Emperor, has jurisdiction; that is to say, when
anyone admits that he brought the charge either through mistake, rashly, or in
the heat of anger, for an accuser who makes an explanation of this kind affords
good ground for abolition.
Where, however, the accuser, either through fraud, or having been corrupted by
the money of the defendant, requests the dismissal of the case, the voice of
purchased commiseration shall not be heard, but trial of the guilty party shall
proceed, and the proper penalty be imposed. Persons who protect themselves and
their families from injury, by accusing their own relatives, are by no means
prohibited from asking that the prosecutions which they have instituted be
abandoned.
Given on the sixteenth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Constantine, Consul for the fifth time, and Licinius, 319.
3. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Florus, Prsetorian
Prefect.
Permission to dismiss a criminal charge, which has been wrongfully brought by
the accusers, shall not be granted. If, however, anyone should inaugurate a
prosecution in good faith, and the defendant sustain some injury on account of
the written accusation, that is to say, if he should be imprisoned, or
subjected to torture or scourging, or placed in chains, abolition shall not be
granted, unless he who suffered the wrong consents for this to be done.
But when the defendant did not suffer anything of this kind, and was afterwards
delivered up to the officers of justice for safe custody, the accuser will be
permitted to apply for a dismissal of the case within thirty days, even against
the wishes of the defendant; but We decree that such permission shall not be
granted after this time, unless the defendant gives his consent. If any
freeborn persons, although of plebeian origin, who were not accomplices and
participants in the crime, should, for the purpose of obtaining evidence, have
been subjected to scourging and torture, We order that the judge shall refuse
to dismiss the case, even at the request of both parties, and that the trial,
in which torture was applied, shall proceed.
Even though it may not have been inflicted upon the witnesses, absolution shall
not be granted for certain crimes (such as in high treason, rebellion,
treachery, embezzlement, violation of oaths, and all the other offences
included in the ancient law) in which a judge should
require the accuser not only to prove what he alleges, but the defendant, who
denies the charge, to clear himself, if he can do so.
Given on the day before the Idesof October, during the Consulate of our Prince
Valentinian, and Victor, 369.

* TITLE XLIII. CONCERNING GENERAL ABOLITION.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Rutilianus, Consular of Cilicia.
Anyone who, having the power to bring a criminal accusation, after a general
amnesty of all criminals has been proclaimed in the usual manner, neglects to
prosecute within the time specified by the Edict, shall not be heard.
Published on the eighth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of Lsetus,
Consul for the second time, and Cerealis, 216.
2. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Paulinus.
As the accusation was not brought by you at the time when Our indulgence
pardoned all crimes, the prescription based upon public amnesty does not apply.
Published on the sixth of the Idesof February, during the Consulate of Maximus,
Consul for the second time, and Aquilinus, 286.
3. The Emperors Valentinian, Valens, and Gratian to the Senate.
Conscript Fathers, pardon brands with infamy those whom it liberates, for it
does not remove the disgrace of the crime, but merely dispenses with the
punishment.
Given on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof June, during the Consulate of Gratian,
Consul for the second time, and Probus, 371.

* TITLE XLIV.
CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS SHOULD BE TERMINATED WITHIN A CERTAIN TIME.
1. The Emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius to Desi-derius,
Vicegerent of Asia.
If any accuser should, in writing, denounce a defendant in court, and fail to
proceed with the accusation, which he began, within the time prescribed by law,
or should not appear upon the last day, which is an act of contumacy, he shall
be fined the fourth part of all his property, and shall undergo the legal
penalties, in addition to the infamy ordered by the ancient laws.
Given on the fourth of the Idesof July, during the Consulate of Arcadius and
Bauto, 385.
2. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Cecilianus, Prsetorian Prefect.
All judges, no matter what offices they hold, or over what tribunals they
preside, are notified that necessary delays must not be refused to
either of the parties in criminal cases (if they are requested), that is to
say, after a written information has been filed; but the trial should take
place within a certain time, and if this has elapsed, the accuser who failed to
prosecute the case shall suffer the punishment prescribed by the laws. If he is
a person of such inferior rank that he will sustain no damage by the loss of
his reputation, he shall be subjected to the penalty of exile, unless the case
is dismissed by the consent of both parties within the time established by law.
Moreover, the diligence of judges should be such that no good reason can arise
for either the defendant or the prosecutor to ask for delay, and they should
press the hearing of cases of this kind without expecting a continuance.
Given at Ravenna, on the twelfth of the Kalendsof February, during the
Consulate of Honorius, Consul for the eighth time, and Theodosius, Consul for
the third time, 409.
3. The Emperor Justinian to Menna, Prsetorian Prefect.
We decree that criminal cases shall, by all means, be terminated within two
years from the time when issue was joined, nor shall this period be extended
under any pretext; but, after the two years have elapsed, the case shall not
proceed further but the accused shall be discharged. Judges and their
subordinate officials are hereby notified that if, at the request of litigants,
they should delay the examination or trial of a case beyond the time aforesaid,
they must pay a fine of twenty pounds of gold.
Given on the Kalendsof April ....

* TITLE XLV.
ON THE TURPILLIAN DECREE OF THE SENATE.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Amatus.
He is held to be liable to the penalty imposed by the Decree of the Senate who,
after having denounced a public crime, and begun the prosecution of the same,
that is to say, filed a written accusation, furnished a surety, and, caused the
arrest of the accused and his delivery into custody, abandons the case without
having previously caused it to be dismissed.
2. The Emperor Gordian to Apius.
If you became surety for someone who had brought a criminal accusation in
writing, and afterwards desisted from the prosecution, and you bound yourself
by a stipulation, you will not be liable for any sum above that specified in
the contract. He, however, who failed to prosecute shall be branded with
infamy, and severely punished by the judicial authorities.
3. The Emperors Valerian and Gattienus to Syllanus.Although the written
instrument in question contained the provision that abolition of the crime
should first be demanded, and that
afterwards the accused would comply with everything mentioned therein, and your
adversary failed to keep the promises which he made to you, you cannot renew
the accusation from which you yourself desisted.
Published on the day before the Nonesof July, during the Consulate of Tuscus
and Bassus, 259.
4. The Same Emperors to Patrophilus.
If the person against whom you petition has renewed an accusation against your
parents, which you allege he had abandoned, an exception on this ground can be
pleaded against him in the tribunal of the governor.
Published on the day before the Nonesof May, during the Consulate of Secularus
and Donatus, 261.
5. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Matrona.
When a woman prosecutes anyone for an injury committed against her or her
relatives, and afterwards acknowledges that she desisted under an agreement
contrary to the ancient laws, it is a positive rule of law that she has
incurred the penalty imposed by the Turpillian Decree of the Senate.
Given on the seventh of the Nonesof April, during the Consulate of the Caesars.
6. The Same Emperors to Lucilius.
In criminal prosecutions, those are considered to have desisted who have
abandoned the case without the intention of renewing the accusation. Therefore,
as your petition states that your ignorance was one of the reasons why you did
not prosecute the case to the end, you can, without any apprehension of
hindrance on account of the short interruption which took place, proceed with
the accusation according to law and bring it to a termination, after having
proved what is required of you.
Published on the third of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of
Diocletian, Consul for the sixth time, and Maximian, 296.

*
* TITLE XLVI. CONCERNING CALUMNIATORS.
1. The Emperor Alexander to Sabinus.
An accusation of calumny should be prosecuted from the time the charge was
heard in the presence of the accuser, and therefore, the case having been
decided, it is contrary to the ordinary practice for you to demand that your
accuser be punished for calumny.
2. The Same Emperor to Apollonia.
A mother is included among those persons who, without the fear of calumny, can
avenge the death of her son, and the benefit of the Decree of the Senate is
also granted her in other prosecutions.
A foreign heir, who prosecutes anyone on account of suspicions entertained by
the deceased with reference to his death, is released from liability for
calumny on this account, as a great difference exists between a voluntary
accusation and that required of the heir on account of his position.
Published on the sixth of the Kalendsof July, during the Consulate of Julian
and Crispus, 226.
3. The Same Emperor to ^milius.
When anyone who is unable to prove the accusation of crime which he brought is
not convicted of calumny, he will sustain no loss of reputation ; for if the
defendant should be acquitted, the accuser ought not to be considered a
calumniator merely on that account, if he had good reason for bringing the
charge.
4. The Emperors Cams, Carinus, and Numerianus to Arcadius.
The penalty of calumny cannot be inflicted on account of an accusation brought
to avenge the death of a father.
Published on the eleventh of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of
Carus and Carinus, 283.
5. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Cassius.
Persons can only be convicted of calumny who prosecute criminal cases, and not
those who institute legal proceedings involving freedom, and which also include
private matters that are the subject of controversy.
6. The Same Emperors to Domitius.
The penalty of double damages is provided by the Julian Law in favor of the
owners of slaves, where the latter have been subjected to torture by the false
denunciation of an accuser.
Ordered on the fifteenth ....
7. The Emperors Valentinian and Valens to Valerius.
Your Excellency should not order anyone to be brought before your tribunal for
examination unless the accuser has previously complied with all the legal
formalities required; as, according to the provisions of the ancient laws, when
an accusation is brought, the defendant shall be punished if it is proved; and
where the accuser fails to establish the charge, he himself must suffer the
penalty.
Given on the sixth of the Kalendsof December, during the Consulate of Gratian
and Gadalaifus.
8. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Menan-drius, Vicegerent
of Asia.
It is stated both in Our Constitutions and in those of Our predecessors that
persons who bring accusations in the names of others shall be classed as
informers. Hence if the accusation is known to be false, the penalty of infamy
will be imposed upon him whose charge was
not proved in court; wherefore, all persons are notified that they will not be
permitted to bring to the attention of judges criminal accusations which cannot
be established.
Given at Constantinople, on the eighth of the Idesof May, during the Consulate
of Arcadius and Bauto, 385.
9. The Same Emperors to Florus, Prsetorian Prefect.
No legal pretext advanced by way of excuse will be of any advantage to a man
who brings a false accusation, especially after the defendant has been produced
in court, nor will any public or private abolition profit, or be of any
advantage to such a person, nor will any special indulgence or general
privilege release him from liability.
Given at Constantinople, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof June, during the
Consulate of Antonius and Syagrius, 382.
10. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to the Praetors, the Tribunes of the
People, and the Senate, Greeting:
Anyone who brings a criminal accusation is informed that if it should prove to
be false he will not go unpunished, as those who are guilty of calumny will be
liable to the same penalty as the accused persons, had they been convicted.1
Given on the eighth of the Idesof August, during the Consulate of the above-
mentioned Emperors.

* TITLE XLVII. CONCERNING PUNISHMENTS.
1. The Emperor Titus JElius Antoninus to Lucius.
The condition of persons condemned to hard labor for life is not different from
that of those who have been sentenced to deportation to an island.
Without date or designation of Consulate.
2. The Emperor Antoninus to Valerius.
My Attorney, who was not acting as Governor, could not inflict upon you the
penalty of exile, and therefore you need have no apprehension of his sentence,
as it was not in conformity to law.
3. The Same Emperor to the Senate.
It is clear that a decurion cannot be sentenced to labor on the public works.
1 Calumnia,as referred to above in the text, means malicious criminal
prosecution, whose employment, together with promoting vexatious or groundless
lawsuits, or demanding money for not doing so, constituted one of the most
common and detested offences enumerated in Roman jurisprudence. All
participants in it, whether directly or indirectly implicated, were liable to
the penalty, which, in addition to the damages recoverable by an action,
entailed the opprobrium of infamy.—ED.
4. The Same Emperor to Marina.
If the child mentioned by you in your application was conceived before his
mother was sentenced to the mines, his condition after his birth will be that
of his mother before her conviction.
5. The Same Emperor to the Senate.
It is one of the privileges of veterans that their children, as far as the
first degree, cannot be sentenced to the mines or the public works, but must be
relegated to an island.
6. The Same Emperor to Alphius.
Your statement that a freeman has been condemned to imprisonment in chains for
life is incredible, for this penalty can scarcely be imposed upon a person of
servile condition.
Published on the third of the Idesof February, during the Consulate of Messala
and Sabinus, 215.
7. The Emperor Alexander to Isidore.
Immunity for the commission of crime is not conceded on account of age, when
anyone is capable of perpetrating the crime of which he is accused.
8. The Same Emperor to Victor.
The property of persons who have been deported to an island by a judge having
proper jurisdiction shall be confiscated to the Treasury, but that of those who
have been relegated shall not be confiscated, unless this is expressly included
in the sentence.
9. The Same Emperor to Demetrius.
If it should be proved that your mother was the daughter of a decurion, it is
apparent that she cannot be condemned to work for persons employed in the
mines, or to the mines themselves.
10. The Same Emperor to Catullus.
Where a slave has been sentenced by the Governor of a province to the penalty
of confinement in chains, without prescribing any time when he shall be
returned to his master, he should be kept in chains for life.
11. The Emperor Gordian to Titian.
The punishment of performing menial services for persons employed in the mines
can be inflicted upon free men and women, as well as upon those in a servile
condition.
12. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian Stated in the Consistory :
"The sons of decurions should not be thrown to wild beasts." When, on hearing
this, the people cried out, the Emperors added: "No attention should be paid to
the vain remonstrances of the popu-
lace; for they should not be believed, either when they desire a criminal to be
pardoned, or an innocent person to be condemned."
13. The Same Emperor to Ursinus.
After a slave has been convicted, if his master has not been deprived of his
ownership by the sentence, he has a right to demand his services.
14. The Same Emperors and Ctesars to Vicarius.
If the time designated in a sentence of labor oh the public works has not yet
expired, it is proper to wait until it has elapsed; as it is to the public
interest for a penalty not to be hastily remitted, lest someone may, for this
reason, rashly commit crime.
15. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Agathus.
It is not lawful to revoke the penalty imposed by a sentence of the Governor of
a province.
16. The Emperor Constantine to Catulinus, Proconsul of Africa.
Let the judge about to pass sentence exercise moderation, so that before
imposing a capital penalty upon anyone, as in the case of adultery, homicide,
or witchcraft, the accused may be convicted either by his own confession, or by
the positive statements of persons subjected to torture, or interrogated; so
that there may be a general agreement of the testimony with reference to his
guilt, and he may be implicated to such an extent that it will scarcely be
necessary for him who committed the crime to deny it.
Given on the third of the Nonesof November, during the Consulate of Volusianus
and Annianus, 314.
17. The Same Emperor to Eumelius.
Where anyone has been condemned to the mines for a criminal offence, he shall
not be branded upon the face, as this part of his sentence can be impressed
upon his hand, or the calf of his leg by a single mark; and his face, which has
been formed in the image of celestial beauty, shall not suffer disfigurement.
Given on the twelfth of the Kalendsof April, during the fourth Consulate of
Constantine and Licinius, 315.
18. The Emperor Constantius to Theodore, Governor of Arabia.
As a certain time was granted the defendants, who were convicted by clear
evidence, before sentence was passed, the right of petitioning the Emperor as
well as the opportunity of evading the penalties incurred by their criminal
acts was afforded them; and, as in the crime of homicide and other serious
offences punishment should not be deferred, the laws having reference to crime
must hereafter be observed, and convicted criminals and malefactors be
sentenced without delay.
Given on the Idesof October, during the Consulate of Constantius. Consul for
the fourth time, and Constans, 343.
19. The Emperors Valentinian and Valens to Olybrius, Prefect of the City.
Let no one, by way of punishment for crime, be transferred from one guild to
another, if he is a member of any, but every culprit shall experience the
severity of the law prescribed for the crime of which he was convicted.
Given on the third of the Idesof April, during the Consulate of Valentinian,
365.
20. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Flavian, Prsetorian
Prefect of Illyria and Italy.
If, having in view the circumstances of the case, We, contrary to Our custom,
should order any persons to be punished with exemplary severity, We are not
willing for the guilty parties to suffer the penalty immediately, or the
sentence to be executed without delay; but desire that their fate and fortune
shall remain in suspense for the term of thirty days.
The defendants, however, must be placed in safe custody, and vigilantly guarded
during the time aforesaid.
Given at Verona, on the fifth of the Kalendsof September, during the Consulate
of Antonius and Syagrius, 382.
21. The Emperors Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius to Prin-cipius,
Prsetorian Prefect.
In order that the depraved and venal perfidy of court attendants may not
hereafter be exercised with impunity contrary to the public welfare,'We decree
that legal penalties can be pronounced against them even during their absence.
Given on the Kalendsof June, during the Consulate of Arcadius and Bauto, 385.
22. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Eutychianus, Prsetorian Prefect.
We order that punishment shall be inflicted only upon those who are liable to
it, and We exclude all relatives, acquaintances, and companions from the
imputation of calumny, as association with criminals does not necessarily
render them guilty, and neither affinity nor friendship presumes implication in
crime. Therefore, let each one be responsible for the offences which he himself
commits, and let the fear of punishment go no further than the detection of
guilt.
This law shall be communicated to all judges.
Given at Constantinople, on the eighth of the Kalendsof August, during the
Consulate of Eutropius and Theodore, 399.
23. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius to Anthemius, Pr&-torian Prefect.
We decree that all those whom the terms of their sentences have condemned to
exile, and who have served the designated time in prison, shall at once be
liberated from custody, and released from their
chains, as they have paid the penalty, and need not apprehend the wretchedness
of exile. It will be sufficient for them to have undergone such severe
punishment, nor shall those who have been long deprived of the common blessings
of air and light, and for an extended period have been oppressed with heavy
chains, be compelled to suffer the penalty of exile in addition.
Given on the fourteenth of the Kalendsof May, during the Consulate of
Constantius and Constans, 414.
24. The Same Emperors to Monachius, Prastorian Prefect.
We order all Governors of provinces to see that persons who have been condemned
to undergo the penalty of exile for a certain time, shall, as soon as that time
has expired, be no longer confined in prison, or kept under restraint in the
places to which they were exiled.
Given at Eudoxiopolis, on the third of the Kalendsof September, during the
Consulate of Our Lord the Emperor Theodosius, Consul for the seventh time, and
Balladius, 416.
25. The Same Emperors to Monaxius, Praetorian Prefect.
We decree that those who instruct barbarians how to build ships, when the
latter were previously ignorant of the art, shall be put to death.
Given at Constantinople, on the eighth of the Kalendsof October, during the
Consulate of Monaxius and Pinta, 419.

* TITLE XLVIII. CERTAIN JUDGES SHALL NOT BE PERMITTED TO CONFISCATE PROPERTY WITHOUT THE ORDER OF THE EMPEROR.
1. The Emperor Theodosius and the Caesar Valentinian to Hierius, Prsetorian
Prefect.
No judge (with the exception of those of the highest rank) shall be permitted,
during times of prescription, to confiscate the entire property of anyone,
unless he has first made application to Us to do so.
Given at Constantinople, on the tenth of the Kalendsof February, during the
Consulate of Theodosius, Consul for the eleventh time, and the Caesar
Valentinian, 425.

* TITLE XLIX. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN PROSCRIBED OR CONDEMNED.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Marcus.
It is well known that masters are not deprived of the peculiumof any of their
slaves who have been convicted of a capital crime, but a master shall receive
whatever he can prove belonged to his slave, and the price of the property, if
any has been sold by him; and power
is also granted to suspend sentence until the accounts of his administration
have been rendered by the slave, and the disposition of the property explained.
The master should, however, remember that this must be done quickly in order
that the slave may be delivered up to punishment.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Pronto.
Persons sentenced to deportation do not transmit to their heirs any property
which they may have acquired after their conviction; but this, as well as what
they previously possessed, shall be confiscated.
3. The Same Emperor to Julianus.
If your son, while under your control, was sentenced to deportation to an
island, you will not be deprived of his peculium,which he obtained in military
service, or which you gave him while in the army.
Published on the sixth of the Idesof September, during the Consulate of
Alexander, Consul for the second time, and Marcellus, 227.
4. The Emperor Gordian to Callimorphus.
Anyone who is condemned to the mines becomes a penal slave, hence the property
of him upon whom a sentence of this kind has been imposed is confiscated to the
Treasury. Therefore, if you allege that he who was afterwards pardoned by Us
had any property, it will belong to the Treasury rather than to him who was
sentenced.
5. The Emperor Philip to Arrian.
If (as you allege) the property of him who administered your guardianship and
was sentenced has been confiscated to the Treasury, apply to Our Attorney who,
if he ascertains that you are legally entitled to anything, will not refuse it.
6. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Gaudentius.It is a positive rule of
law that children are entitled to none of the property of their mother, who has
been condemned to deportation.
7. The Emperors Valentinian, Valens, and Gratian to Probus, Prsetorian Prefect.
If anyone in a province should incur the penalty of proscription, on account of
the nature of his crime, a complete inventory of his property must be carefully
made by the proper authority, to prevent anything from being abstracted through
favor of collusion; and a full description must be given of the extent and
character of the land, and what proportion of it is tilled, or unimproved, how
much of it is susceptible of cultivation, and how much in vineyards, olive
orchards, pasture, and timber.
There should also be included a statement of the advantages and beauty of the
property, as well as the decorations of the buildings, and how many slaves are
used in the cultivation of the land, whether
they are from the city or the country, and in what occupations they are
engaged. It should also be stated how many collectors there are, as well as the
number of tenants and oxen employed in the tillage of the soil; the number of
cattle and sheep, and the kinds of each; the quantity of gold, silver,
clothing, jewels; and whether the metal is coined, or in bulk; and the
designation of the various coins, as well as the amount of property deposited
in storehouses. After everything that you perceive that We desire has been
entered in the inventory, it should be delivered to the Steward of Our Private
Affairs, or to the officials of the palace appointed for this purpose, in order
that it may become part of the property of the Crown.
Moreover, an account of everything specified and separately enumerated should
be sent to Us, under seal of the judge, and there is no doubt that if he should
be guilty of negligence in this respect he must be fined. If, after the
examination made by the aforesaid official and reported to the Steward of Our
Private Affairs, to whom the inventory should be sent, it should be found that
something had been fraudulently omitted from the list, the said official shall
be punished by being compelled to pay the amount which has been fraudulently
suppressed, out of his own property.
Given on the third of the Nonesof May, during the Consulate of the Noble Prince
Valentinian and Victor, 369.
8. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to Eutro-pius, Praetorian
Prefect.
When a person sentenced to deportation has sons, some of whom are emancipated
and some are not, the portion of his estate to which his children are entitled
shall be transferred only to those under his control, if those who have been
emancipated think that, by relinquishing what they obtained at the time when
this occurred, they will sustain loss. If, however, they should prefer that a
merger of property and donations should take place, everything which the
Treasury grants to the children of a condemned criminal shall be equally
divided among them.
This rule shall also be observed with reference to the dowry of a daughter, or
a granddaughter by the son of a person condemned to deportation.
Given at Thessalonica, on the fifteenth of the Kalendsof July, during the
Consulate of Gratian, Consul for the fifth time, and Theodosius, 380.
9. The Emperors Arcadius and Honorius to Csesarius, Prastorian Prefect.
When anyone is sentenced to deportation, his wife can claim her own property,
no matter how she may have acquired it, and even if it has already been seized,
or taken possession of in any way, she will be entitled to receive it at once.
Her dowry, also, if it can be proved that she actually gave it to her husband
(but not what is sometimes inserted without effect in dotal instruments) shall
be delivered to her.
Again, anything which she received by way of donation from her husband before
marriage, or which came into her hands during marriage, through the generosity
of her husband, before his conviction, will undoubtedly belong to her.
(1) Moreover, if it should appear clearly that any property had been given by a
father to his emancipated children, before the commission of the crime and his
conviction, it shall be reserved for them unimpaired, and without controversy.
Anything, however, which neither the wife nor the emancipated children can
legally claim, I decree shall be seized by the public authorities, and
confiscated, and a report made to Me stating whether the condemned person has
any children; and it should also be added whether they claimed anything for
themselves on the ground of a donation.
(2) With regard to those who are indebted to the Treasury, and have been
proscribed and condemned on this account, it has been decided that where the
wife has any property of her own, or any which was given to her by her husband
before he committed the act on account of which the prosecution for fraud was
instituted, and if anything was afterwards donated to his emancipated sons,
before the perpetration of the crime, it shall remain intact in the hands of
those who received it; and no one shall, under any circumstances, be held
liable to the Treasury, except for what the convicted criminal himself owned
when he contracted the obligation to the Treasury, or what he purchased in his
own name, or in that of his wife, his children, or anyone else.1
-1In the early days of Roman jurisprudence, confiscation of personal property
always followed a sentence of death or exile. This was subsequently extended to
all convictions of crime punishable with penal servitude for life.
The provisions of the ancient English law, which subjected a convicted traitor
to the forfeiture of his property, both real and personal, and anyone convicted
of felony to the confiscation of his goods and chattels, have been rescinded in
recent times. A marked distinction existed between the forfeiture of real
estate and that of chattels, for land was forfeited to the Crown upon
attainder, but the loss of personal effects was a necessary incident of
conviction without it. (VideStephen, Commentaries of the Laws of England I, VI,
XX.)
By the Forfeiture Act of 1870 (33 & 34 Vie., C. 23) guilt of treason or felony
was declared to no longer entail confiscation; and this penalty, which for many
centuries had been a source of grievous oppression to the unfortunate families
of convicted malefactors, was abolished.
The confiscation of the enemy's property by a hostile government, while
generally recognized, is subject to many modifications; and a distinction is
made between what belongs to the State and what is owned by individuals. The
title to chattels vests upon occupation, but that of land only after absolute
conquest. (VideBaker, First Steps in International Law, Chap. XXI, Pages 226,
227, 228.)
This principle has a much more extended application in the United States, where
the Supreme Court has held: "That war gave to the sovereign full right to take
the persons and confiscate the property of the enemy wherever found; and that
the mitigations of this rigid rule which the wise and humane policy of modern
times had introduced into practice, might, more or less, affect the exercise of
the right, but could not impair the right itself." (Brown vs. The United
States, 8
Cranch, 110.)
This doctrine does not apply where treaty provisions exist to the contrary,
contingent, of course, upon the proper behavior of the alien enemies whose
property otherwise would be subject to seizure and appropriation by the
State.—ED.
Those, however, are only excepted who have performed the duties of Caesarians
or Catholici, who are excluded from every privilege until their accounts have
been approved and accepted by Me, and they shall then have the right to
transmit any of their property which is clear of encumbrance.
Given at Constantinople, on the third of the Nonesof August, during the
Consulate of Arcadius, Consul for the fourth time, and Honorius, Consul for the
third time, 396.
10. The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian to Hierius, Prse-torian Prefect.
When anyone is convicted of a crime and sentenced to death or deportation, his
property shall be confiscated to the Treasury, if he dies without issue. When,
however, he is survived by sons or daughters, or grandchildren by his sons,
after half of his estate has been confiscated to the Treasury, the remainder
shall be reserved for them.
The same rule applies if he should leave posthumous children. If he who
incurred this penalty was a decurion, and had no children, his curiashall
succeed to him, and will be entitled to his entire estate, and can itself
either hold it or transfer it to another, who shall discharge the official
duties of the deceased at his own risk.
If, however, the decurion had sons, even though they were not yet born, they
will be entitled to the entire estate of their father. If there are any
daughters, they will have a right to half of the estate, and the curiato the
other half. When there are both sons and daughters, half of the estate shall be
given to the sons, in the name of the curia,and the other half, which the
indulgence of the Emperor has assigned to all in common, shall be divided
equally among the children, except in cases of high treason, for, under such
circumstances, anyone who was guilty of such an atrocious crime shall justly
transmit his penalty to his posterity.
Given at Constantinople, on the tenth of the Kalendsof February, during the
Consulate of Our Lord Theodosius, Consul for the twelfth time, and Valentinian,
Consul for the second time, 426.
Extract from Novel 134, Last Chapter. Latin Text.
The property of those who have been condemned or proscribed is not confiscated
for the benefit of the judges or their officers, nor, in accordance with the
ancient laws, for the benefit of the Treasury; but should be given to the
ascendants and descendants of the person convicted, or to his collateral heirs,
as far as the third degree, if there are any.
Moreover, their wives are entitled to their dowries and antenuptial donations.
Where, however, they were married without any dowry, they will receive from the
estates of their husbands the portion designated by law, whether they have any
children or not. When the condemned persons leave none of the heirs above
mentioned, their property shall be confiscated to the Treasury. We order that
the ancient laws shall be observed with reference to persons convicted of the
crime of treason.

* TITLE L. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THOSE WHO COMMIT SUICIDE.
1. The Emperor Antoninus to Aquilia.
The property of those who, having ascertained that their crime has been
discovered, through fear of a future sentence, lay violent hands upon
themselves, shall be confiscated to the Treasury. Therefore, if if should be
proved that your brother or your father, having committed no offence, but on
account of corporeal suffering, weariness of life, a sudden attack of rage or
insanity, or for any other reason, put an end to his life, his property shall
belong to his heirs, whether he left a will, or died intestate.
2. The Emperor Alexander to Rusticus.
The estates of those who, after having been accused of crime, commit suicide—if
the accusation is not for treason, and they did not kill themselves through
fear of its results—are transmitted to their heirs.


* TITLE LI. CONCERNING THOSE WHO HAVE SERVED THEIR SENTENCES AND BEEN PARDONED.
1. The Emperor Antoninus.
When the Emperor, having bidden farewell to the illustrious Przetorian Prefects
Gentian, Adventus, and Opilius-Macrinus, and to his friends and principal
officers both civil and military, was about to depart, Julianus Licinianus, who
had been sentenced to deportation to an island, was presented to him by
Opilius-Ulpianus, at that time Lieutenant of the Emperor, and Antoninus
Augustus said to him: "I restore you to your province with all your rights,"
and added, "Moreover, that you may know what it means to be restored to all
your rights, I hereby reinstate you in your offices, your rank, and all your
other privileges."
2. The Same Emperor to Quietus.
If, as you allege, your father has been sentenced to the mines, it is only
right that his property should be confiscated to the Treasury; and if, through
My clemency he has been released only from the penalty, he did not, for this
reason, obtain the restitution of his property, unless this favor was
especially granted him.
3. The Emperor Alexander to Stratonicus.
If the debtor underwent the penalty to which he was sentenced, and his property
was taken from him, even though he afterwards recovered his Roman citizenship,
he did not obtain his entire property, but only a portion of the same through
the favor of the Emperor; and
he is released from the obligation of the payment of the entire indebtedness
contracted before his conviction, but will only be liable in proportion to the
amount which he recovered. If, however, his property was confiscated to the
Treasury, on account of the money which he owed it, he and his sureties will
remain liable to his creditors for his debts.
4. The Same Emperor to Valentina.
The guardian of your children, prsetorian possession of whose estates you say
that you have received, having been condemned to the mines, and afterwards
having returned under a general amnesty, although he has. become more wealthy,
will not be liable to you in an action for the administration of guardianship;
unless by the terms of his pardon he was expressly restored to his former
condition, and the possession of all his property.
5. The Same Emperor to Julianus.
Although, after having been deported to an island and your property
confiscated, you may have returned under the general amnesty, still, any rights
of action to which you are entitled belong to the Treasury; and hence your
demand that actions may be granted in your favor against the heirs of your
guardian is contrary to law.
6. The Emperor Gordian to Fabianus, Prsetorian Prefect.
As your son has been deported to an island, he was, for this reason, released
from paternal control; and if (as you allege) he afterwards returned to his
country and was restored to his former rank through the clemency of the Divine
Alexander, paternal authority is not considered to have been re-established
over him.
7. The Emperor Philip to Cassius.
Our general amnesty permitted all exiled or deported persons to return, but did
not restore to them the offices of which they were deprived, nor did they
recover their reputations intact and unimpaired.
8. The Emperors Valerian and Gallienus to Seleucius.
You are mistaken if you think that you still have any rights over your slave,
who was condemned to the mines, and afterwards pardoned, for it has not been
decided that by an act of indulgence of this kind the former ownership of a
master is restored. The Governor of the province, however, will see that you do
not suffer any injury from the slave; and if he has any of your property in his
possession, the Attorney of the Crown will decide the dispute between you, for
the slave belongs to the Treasury.
9. The Emperors Diocletian and Maximian to Restitutus.
If your father, after having been deported to an island, was restored to his
country by a general amnesty, and did not expressly obtain the privilege of
having his children again placed under his con-
trol, there is no doubt that the estate obtained by you is not acquired for his
benefit, as the sentence passed upon him rendered you the head of the family.
10. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Demetrius.
As you return to your home by virtue of Our clemency, you need not apprehend
that you will be subjected to prosecution by the Governor of the province,
whose annotation has already been annulled.
11. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Philip.
The fact that he who brought an action with reference to a tract of land was
through Our benevolence restored to his country and the possession of his
property, after having been sentenced to deportation, does not alter the former
condition of the case.

12. The Same Emperors and Csesars to Trypho, Prsetorian Prefect.
Where a person condemned to deportation was pardoned by Us, and recovered his
property, he cannot protect himself against his creditors, and avoid paying his
legal debts under the pretext of having paid the penalty of his crime.

13. The Emperor Constantine to Maximus, Prefect of the City.
With reference to the will which the son of a man who was deported made during
the lifetime of his father, We, rejecting the opinions of Ulpianus and Paulus,
have adopted that of Papinianus, namely, that the son is again placed under the
control of his father, to whom his rank and property have been restored.
(1) Nevertheless, any transactions entered into by the son shall be considered
valid, if he had reached lawful age; and, after he has been restored to
paternal authority, they should not be rescinded, as it would be absurd for
anyone at the same time to be neither under the control of his father, nor his
own master.
(2) Minors are forbidden by law to transact any business. If, after the
condemnation of their father, a guardian should be appointed for them, he must
relinquish his office as soon as the former returns, as he should not only
nominally return, but must also discharge his paternal duty, and see that his
children are not corrupted, and that their property is cared for and increased.
For if he abuses his authority to the extent of destroying or wasting the
property of his children, the latter should be treated in the same manner as
insane or demented persons, or spendthrifts, or those given to all lusts and
vices, to whom money ought not to be entrusted; and such a father should be
removed from the administration, and not only cease to be guardian, but must,
out of his own property, indemnify the minor for any useless expense or loss
which he has sustained. Moreover, the sentence of deportation cannot be
advanced to the prejudice of the father.
(3) If, after his return, the integrity of the father should be found to be
unimpaired, so that he ought to be restored to his natural
position, and the discharge of his duty to his offspring, the management of
their property should be transferred to him whose care resembles that
established by the public law. And unless this is done where fathers are good,
their return will be more doleful than their departure, so far as the children
are concerned.
(4) Therefore a pardon is beneficial for the purpose of restitution only to the
extent that the sentence was beneficial for correction, so that, if the loss of
all his property resulted from deportation, by means of pardon his possessions,
his rank, and everything of which he was deprived, including his good name,
will be regained. Hence sons request emancipation from their fathers in order
that they may obtain freedom, not because of a judicial sentence, but as an
evidence of paternal affection.
Given at Sirmium, on the eighteenth of the Kalendsof October, during the second
Consulate of the Caesars, Crispus and Constantine, 321.
