# -*- mode: org -*-

* BOOK XLVIII.
+ 48.I. ON CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS
+ 48.II. CONCERNING ACCUSATIONS AND INSCRIPTIONS
+ 48.III. CONCERNING THE CUSTODY AND APPEARANCE OF DEFENDANTS IN CRIMINAL CASES
+ 48.IV. ON THE JULIAN LAW RELATING TO THE CRIME OF LESE MAJESTY
+ 48.V. CONCERNING THE JULIAN LAW FOR THE PUNISHMENT OF ADULTERY
+ 48.VI. CONCERNING THE JULIAN LAW ON PUBLIC VIOLENCE
+ 48.VII. CONCERNING THE JULIAN LAW RELATING TO PRIVATE VIOLENCE
+ 48.VIII. CONCERNING THE CORNELIAN LAW RELATING TO ASSASSINS AND POISONERS
+ 48.IX. CONCERNING THE POMPEIAN LAW ON PARRICIDES
+ 48.X. CONCERNING THE CORNELIAN LAW ON DECEIT AND THE LIBONIAN DECREE OF THE SENATE
+ 48.XI. CONCERNING THE JULIAN LAW ON EXTORTION
+ 48.XII. CONCERNING THE JULIAN LAW ON PROVISIONS
+ 48.XIII. CONCERNING THE JULIAN LAW RELATING TO PECULATION, SACRILEGE, AND BALANCES
+ 48.XIV. CONCERNING THE JULIAN LAW WITH REFERENCE TO THE UNLAWFUL SEEKING OF OFFICE
+ 48.XV. CONCERNING THE FAVIAN LAW WITH REFERENCE TO KIDNAPPERS
+ 48.XVI. CONCERNING THE TURPILLIAN DECREE OF THE SENATE AND THE DISMISSAL OF CHARGES
+ 48.XVII. CONCERNING THE CONVICTION OF PERSONS WHO ARE SOUGHT FOR OR ARE ABSENT
+ 48.XVIII. CONCERNING TORTURE
+ 48.XIX. CONCERNING PUNISHMENTS
+ 48.XX. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF PERSONS WHO HAVE BEEN CONVICTED . 125
+ 48.XXI. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THOSE WHO HAVE EITHER KILLED THEMSELVES OR CORRUPTED THEIR ACCUSERS BEFORE JUDGMENT HAS BEEN RENDERED
+ 48.XXII. CONCERNING PERSONS WHO ARE INTERDICTED, RELEGATED, AND DEPORTED
+ 48.XXIII. CONCERNING PERSONS UPON WHOM SENTENCE HAS BEEN PASSED AND WHO HAVE BEEN RESTORED TO THEIR RIGHTS
+ 48.XXIV. CONCERNING THE CORPSES OF PERSONS WHO ARE PUNISHED . 137

* 48.I. ON CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS.

1. Macer, On Criminal Prosecutions, Book I.
All cases in which crime is involved are not public, but only those which are
derived from the laws relating to the prosecution of crimes, such as the Julian
Law on Treason; the Julian Law on Adultery; the Cornelian Law on Assassins and
Poisoners; the Pompeian Law on Parricide; the Julian Law on Peculation; the
Cornelian Law on Wills; the Julian Law on Private Violence; the Julian Law on
Public Violence; the Julian Law on the Bribery of Voters; the Julian Law on
Extortion; and the Julian Law on Raising the Price of Food.
2. Paulus, On the Edict of the Prxtor, Book XV.
Some criminal offences are capital, and some are not. Those which are capital
entail the punishment of exile or banishment; that is to say, the interdiction
of water and fire. For, by these penalties the civil rights of the delinquent
are lost, for the other penalties are properly termed relegation and not exile,
for then the rights of citizenship are retained.
Punishments which are not capital are those where the penalty is either
pecuniary or corporeal.1
3. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXV.
A criminal prosecution is annulled by the death of the defendant of either
sex.2
4. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXVII.
It sometimes happens that a criminal prosecution is prejudiced, as in the
action under the Aquilian Law; in the action of theft, and the one for property
taken by violence; in the interdict Unde viand in that to compel the production
of a will; for in these cases private matters are concerned.

11 The term ""capital," as applicable to punishments aammoonngg tthhee RRoommaannss,, wwhhiillee
iinncclluuddiinngg tthhee eexxttrreemmee ppeennaallttyy,, aallssoo hhaadd rreeffeerreennccee ttoo aannyy eevveenntt aaffffeeccttiinngg tthhee
""ccaappuutt,,""oorr ssttaattuuss ooff tthhee ppeerrssoonn iinn qquueessttiioonn,, tthhaatt iinnvvoollvveedd aa lloossss ooff rriigghhttss,,
tthhee ccoonnsseeqquueennccee ooff wwhhiicchh wwaass cciivviill ddeeaatthh AAmmoonngg tthheessee wwaass tthhee ffoorrffeeiittuurree ooff
cciittiizzeennsshhiipp rreessuullttiinngg ffrroomm ccaappttiivviittyy bbyy tthhee eenneemmyy,, tthhee ccoonnvviiccttiioonn ooff ssoommee
aattrroocciioouuss ccrriimmee ffoorr wwhhiicchh tthhee iinntteerrddiiccttiioonn ooff wwaatteerr aanndd ffiirree wwaass iimmppoosseedd,,
rreedduuccttiioonn ttoo sseerrvviittuuddee,, sseenntteennccee ttoo hhaarrdd llaabboorr iinn tthhee mmiinneess,, aanndd eexxiillee
CCoonnvviiccttiioonn ooff ccrriimmee ffoorr wwhhiicchh tthheessee ppuunniisshhmmeennttss wweerree iinnfflliicctteedd,, iippssoo
ffaaccttoo,,eennttaaiilleedd iinnffaammyy,, aanndd aaffffeecctteedd aa ffoorrffeeiittuurree ooff cciivviill rriigghhttss --- ED..
22 ""CCrriimmeenn mmoorrttee rreeii eexxttiinngguuiittuurr..""---ED..

5. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book Vill.
When anyone is accused of crime, he must prove that he is not guilty, and he
cannot accuse another before he himself has been acquitted; for it is set forth
in the Imperial Constitutions that a defendant must be cleared, not by accusing
others of crime, but by his own innocence.
(1) It is uncertain whether anyone can bring an accusation when he has been
discharged, or when he has suffered punishment; for it was decided by our
Emperor and his Divine Father that he could not begin an accusation after
having been condemned. I think, however, that this only refers to those who
have either lost their right to citizenship or their freedom.
(2) It is clear that accusations which have been begun before conviction can be
completed afterwards.
6. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIV.
Where a person who was accused of crime dies, and the penalty is extinguished,
no matter in what condition the accusation of the ex-. tinguished crime may be,
the magistrate who has jurisdiction of the pecuniary interest involved can
proceed with the investigation.
7. Macer, Public Prosecutions, Book II.
A sentence for every crime does not render a man infamous, but only such as
have the character of public prosecutions. Hence infamy does not result from
condemnation for a crime which is not the subject of public prosecution, unless
the offence can be the subject of an action which, even in the case of a
private judgment, brands the condemned party with infamy, as for instance, that
of theft, that of robbery with violence, and that of injury.
8. Paulus, Public Prosecutions.
The order of conducting public prosecutions for capital offence is no longer in
use; still the penalty prescribed by the laws exists, and the crimes are proved
arbitrarily.
9. Marcianus, On Public Prosecutions, Book I.
It must be remembered that if anyone should not defend his own slave, when he
is accused of a capital crime, he will not be considered as having abandoned
him; and therefore if the slave should be acquitted, he will not become free,
but will still remain the property of his master.
10. Papinianus, Definitions, Book II.
While the case between the accuser and the defendant is pending in court, the
excuse of absence for good reasons is admitted; and although the defendant may
have been called three times a day for three days, he should not be condemned;
or if the accuser should be absent and the defendant present, the former ought
not be convicted of malicious prosecution.
11. Marcianus, On Public Prosecutions, Book X.A slave can be defended by an
attorney appointed by his master, just as well as by his master himself.
12. Modestinus, On Punishments, Book III.
The magistrate who is about to hear the cases of prisoners should invoke the
aid of the most illustrious citizens, as well as of the most eminent advocates,
if they all reside in the principal city of the province where he exercises
jurisdiction.
It is provided by a rescript that prisoners can be examined even on feast days,
so that he may dismiss such as are innocent, and continue the cases of those
who are guilty, and deserve severe punishment.
13. Papinianus, Opinions, Book XV.
If the accuser should die, the case can be prosecuted by another, if the
Governor of the province considers this advisable.
(1) An agent will intervene to no purpose in the prosecution of a crime; and
this applies still more forcibly to the defence. The excuses of absent persons
can be presented to the judges in accordance with the terms of the Decree of
the Senate, and if good reasons are given, the decision will be postponed.
14. The Same, Opinions, Book XVI.
The slaves of a son-in-law having been accused by his father-in-law of
administering poison, the Governor of the province decided that the father had
been guilty of malicious prosecution. I gave it as my opinion that the father
of the deceased should not be included among persons who are infamous, since
although a criminal prosecution might be instituted by the children for the
death of the daughter, the father could bring the accusation without any risk.

* 48.II. CONCERNING ACCUSATIONS AND INSCRIPTIONS/

1. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book I.
Awoman is not permitted to accuse anyone in a criminal case unless she does so
on account of the death of her parents or children,
1 The inseriptioat Civil Law was a formal denunciation of crime against a
person, accompanied by the agreement of the accuser, in case he should fail to
substantiate the truth of his allegations, to voluntarily undergo the penalty
to which the defendant would have been liable had his guilt been established.
(VideCode, IX, II, 16.) This was an ancient proceeding, designed, of course, to
impress the magistrate with the sincerity of the accuser and his ability to
produce the necessary evidence, as well as to remove all suspicion of
calumnia,or malicious prosecution.
The libellus accusationis,corresponding to our information, another ancient
method of filing accusations of crime, or indictments, was also frequently
employed. It is still in use in Scotland. (VideErskine, Principles of the Law
of Scotland, Pages 660, 661, 662.)---ED.
her patron or patroness, and their son, daughter, grandson, or granddaughter.

2. Papinianus, On Adultery, Book I.
Women are permitted to bring a public accusation for certain causes, for
instance, if they do so on account of the death of any of those persons of
either sex against whom they, if unwilling, can not be compelled to appear as
witnesses, under the provisions of the law relating to public testimony. The
Senate arrived at the same conclusion with reference to the Cornelian Law on
Evidence.
Women, however, are allowed to testify publicly in a criminal prosecution
concerning the will of a freedman of their father or their mother.
(1) By the law relating to testaments, the right was conceded to wards, with
the advice of their guardians, to institute a prosecution for the death of
their father, just as a female ward is allowed to institute one for the death
of her grandfather, since the Divine Vespasian permitted wards to bring suit
with reference to the will of their father; but they could proceed by means of
the interdict just as if the will had not been produced.

3. Paulus, On Adultery, Book III.
The following is the form of an accusation, by inscription: "The Consul, and
the date. Before So-and-So, Praetor and Proconsul, Lucius Titius declared that
he accused Msevia under the Lex Julia de Adulter-iis;and alleged that she
committed adultery with Gaius Seius, in such-and-such a house, on such-and-such
a month, during such-and-such a consulate."
It is first necessary to designate the place in which the adultery occurred, as
well as the person with whom it is alleged to have been committed, and the
month; for this is provided by the Julian Law relating to public prosecutions,
and generally speaking, it applies to all who bring an accusation against
anyone. If the prosecutor is unwilling, he need not include the day or the
hour.
(1) Where inscriptions are not drawn up according to law, the name of the
defendant is erased, and the prosecutor has power to renew the accusation.
(2) He who presents the inscription must sign what he has stated, or another
can do so for him if he does not know how to write.
(3) But if he makes an accusation of another crime, as for instance, that of
having lent a house in order that a matron might use it for the purpose of
debauchery, or that of having released a man caught with her in adultery, or
that of having received money after having surprised the guilty parties in the
act, or anything else of this description, it must be included in the document.
(4) If the accuser should die, or, for some other reason, be prevented from
making the accusation, or anything of this kind occurs, the name of the
defendant will be erased, if he requests this to be done. This is provided by
the Julian Law relating to force, as well as by the
C
Decree of the Senate, so that another can again begin the prosecution of the
defendant. Let us see within what time this can take place. It can be done
within thirty available days.

4. Ulpianus, On Adultery, Book II.
A man who has been condemned in a criminal prosecution has no right to accuse
anyone himself, unless, under the terms of the decision he is authorized to
institute criminal proceedings for the death of his children or his patrons, or
the loss of his own property. The right of accusation is also taken away from
those who have been rendered infamous on account of malicious prosecution, as
well as from those who have entered the arena for the purpose of contending
with wild beasts, or who follow the profession of buffoons, or keep women for
prostitution, or have been convicted of prevarication or calumny, or of having
received money in consideration of their accusing anyone, or injuring his
business.

5. The Same, On Adultery, Book HI.
There is no doubt that slaves can also be accused of adultery. Those, however,
who are forbidden to accuse freemen of adultery are themselves forbidden to
accuse slaves. A master, however, can, under a Rescript of the Divine Marcus,
bring an accusation against his own slave for this offence. Therefore, since
the promulgation of this rescript, the master is obliged to accuse his slave,
but if his wife is legally married she can plead an exception in bar.

6. The Same, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book VII.
The Proconsul must hear and discuss clearly all accusations of slight
importance, and either release those against whom they are brought, or whip
them with rods, or, if they are slaves, scourge them.

7. The Same, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book VII.
When anyone accuses another of a crime, he must, first of all, sign the
accusation. This rule has been introduced for the purpose of preventing anyone
from rashly denouncing another, when he knows that his accusation, if false,
will not go unpunished.
(1) Therefore, each accuser must state what crime is the subject of the
accusation, and also that he will persevere in the prosecution until judgment
has been rendered.
(2) The governor should not permit the same person to be again accused of crime
of which he has been acquitted. This the Divine Pius stated in a Rescript
addressed to Salvius Valens. But let us see, while under this Rescript a person
cannot be accused by the same individual, whether he can not be by another.
Where a case has been decided so far as certain persons are concerned, this
does not prejudice others, if he who now appears as an accuser prosecutes on
account of some injury of his own, and proves that he did not know that the
accusation had been brought by another, I think there is good reason that he
should be permitted to make the accusation.
(3) If, however, he should be prosecuted for another crime by the same accuser,
who in the first proceeding calumniated him, I think he who has once been
convicted of malicious prosecution should not readily be permitted to make a
different accusation, although the son of the prosecutor must be allowed to do
so, when he brings another criminal charge against the person whom his father
had accused, as the Divine Pius stated in a Rescript to Julius Candidus.
(4) The same Emperor stated in a Rescript that slaves should be punished in the
place where they are alleged to have perpetrated the offence, and if their
master desires to defend them, he cannot have them sent back into his province,
but must undertake their defence where the illegal act was committed.
(5) The Divine Pius stated in a Rescript addressed to Pontius Proculus that,
where a sacrilegious act had been committed in one province, and afterwards a
less serious crime was perpetrated in another, after having taken cognizance of
the offence committed in his own province, he must send the defendant into the
one where he had been guilty of sacrilege.

8. Macer, On Public Prosecutions, Book II.
We will more readily understand who can bring an accusation if we know who
cannot do so. Hence, certain persons are forbidden to prosecute a crime on
account of their sex or their age, as women, or minors. Many are disqualified
because of their oath, for instance, those who are serving in the army; others
cannot be brought into court on account of their magistracy, or their power, so
long as they exercise this without the commission of fraud. Others, again are
forbidden as the result of their own criminality, for example, infamous
persons. Some are excluded on account of dishonorable gain, such as those who
have filed two accusations signed by them against two different individuals; or
who have received money in consideration of accusing, or not accusing others.
Some are incompetent in consequence of their condition, as, for instance,
freedmen cannot proceed against their patrons.

9. Paulus, Sentences, Book V.
Others are excluded on account of the suspicion of calumny, for instance those
who, having been suborned, have given false testimony.

10. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book VI.
Some cannot bring an accusation on account of their poverty, such as those who
have less than fifty aurei.

11. Macer, On Public Prosecutions, Book II.
Still, all these persons, if they are prosecuting injuries sustained by them,
or the death of near relatives, are not excluded from bringing accusations.
(1) When children and freedmen desire to protect their interests they should
not be prevented from complaining of the acts of their
parents and patrons; for instance, where they state that they have been
forcibly expelled from possession, and do not do so for the purpose of bringing
an accusation of the crime of violence, but in order that they may recover
possession of the property. For, indeed, a son is not forbidden to complain of
the act of his mother, if he alleges that a child has been falsely substituted
by her in order that he might have a co-heir, but he will not be permitted to
accuse his mother under the Cornelian Law.
(2) One person cannot accuse another who has been already accused by a third
party; but anyone who has been publicly or privately acquitted, or whose
accuser has desisted from prosecution, and has been removed from a number of
defendants, may be accused by another.

12. Venuleius Saturninus, On Public Prosecutions, Book II.
It is not lawful to accuse the following persons, namely: the Deputy of the
Emperor, that is to say, the Governor of a province; according to the decision
of Lentulus, rendered during the Consulate of Sylla and Trio; nor the deputy of
a Governor, for a crime which he committed before he obtained his office; nor a
magistrate of the Roman people; nor anyone who is absent on business for the
State; provided he did not depart for the purpose of evading the law.
(1) Persons who are classed as offenders can make use of this privilege, if,
having been discharged, they contend that they should not again be accused,
which is in accordance with the Epistle of the Divine Hadrian addressed to
Glabrio, Consul.
(2) It is provided by the Julian Law relating to criminal proceedings that no
one can prosecute two persons at the same time, unless on account of an injury
which he himself has sustained.
(3) When an accusation is brought against a slave, the same rule should be
observed as if he were free, according to a Decree of the Senate promulgated
when Cotta and Messala were consuls.
(4) Slaves can be accused under all laws, with the exception of the Julian Law
relating to private violence; because those who are condemned under it are
punished by the confiscation of the third part of their property, which penalty
cannot be imposed upon a slave.
The same must be said with reference to other laws, by which either a pecuniary
or a capital penalty is inflicted, which does not apply to slaves, as for
instance, relegation. The Pompeian Law relating to parricide is placed in this
category, because the First Section includes those who have killed their
parents, their blood-relatives, or their patrons; which does not apply to
slaves, so far as the provisions of the law are concerned. But as their nature
is similar, they are punished in the same way. Again Cornelius Sylla was the
author of the decision that a slave is not included in the Cornelian Law which
has reference to injuries; but he is punished arbitrarily by a more severe
penalty.

13. Marciamis, On Public Prosecutions, Book I.
The Divine Severus and Antoninus stated in a Rescript that a woman should be
heard by the Prefect of Subsistence on the ground of the public welfare, if she
brought an accusation relating to the excessive price of provisions. There is
no doubt that persons who have been rendered infamous should be permitted to
institute proceedings of this kind. Soldiers, also, who cannot prosecute the
cases of others, because they guard the peace, can all the more readily be
permitted to bring this accusation. When slaves bring it, they should also be
heard.

14. Paulus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book II.
The Senate decreed that no one can be accused of the same crime under several
laws.

15. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LVI.
Where anyone, having assembled a number of persons, is alleged to have
committed damage with malicious intent, the plaintiff should not be compelled
to abandon his civil action for the purpose of prosecuting the crime.

16. The Same, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book II.
Where several persons appear who desire to accuse the same man of a crime, the
judge should select one of them to bring the accusation; that is to say, after
proper cause has been shown by investigating the character, rank, interest,
age, morals, or any other proper attributes of the accusers.

17. Modestinus, Differences, Book VI.
When a master defends his slave for a capital offence, he is ordered to give
security for his appearance in court.

18. The Same, Opinions, Book XVII.
Titia threatened to prove the will of her brother Gaius to be forged, but did
not comply with the formalities required by the accusation within the time
prescribed by the Governor of the province. The latter decided a second time
that she could not proceed further with the accusation of a forged will. Titia
did not appeal from these decisions, but alleged that, after the time had
expired, she could maintain that the will was void. As Titia did not appeal
from the decision of the Governor, I ask whether she could afterwards renew the
accusation that the will was forged. The answer was that it was not clearly
stated for what reason she should be heard, if she instituted proceedings
disputing the authority of the decision.

19. Callistratus, On Judicial Inquiries, Book V.
The Divine Brothers stated in a Rescript that the heirs of an accuser should
not be compelled to prosecute the crime.
(1) Likewise, the Divine Hadrian stated in a Rescript that no one could be
forced to prosecute several accused persons.

20. Modestinus, On Penalties, Book II.
Penalties involving the loss of property as the result of criminal prosecutions
do not pass to the heirs, unless issue has been joined and conviction has
followed; except in the cases of extortion and treason, which it has been
decided can still be prosecuted even after the death of the defendants, against
whom no proceedings previously had been taken, in order that their property
might be confiscated to the Treasury ; with reference to which the Divine
Severus and Antoninus stated in a Rescript that after anyone had committed such
a crime, he could neither alienate any of his property, nor manumit any of his
slaves. But so far as other offences were concerned, the penalty could begin to
be inflicted upon the heir only where the accusation had been made during the
lifetime of the guilty party, even though conviction did not follow.

21. Papinianus, Opinions, Book XV.
He who is accused of a capital crime is not, before judgment, forbidden to
bring before the Treasury any matter in which he may be interested.

22. The Same, Opinions, Book XVI.
Anyone belonging to another province, who is accused of crime, should be
prosecuted and convicted where the crime is proved to have been committed,
which our most excellent Emperor stated in general terms should also be
observed with reference to soldiers.

* 48.III. CONCERNING THE CUSTODY AND APPEARANCE OP DEPENDANTS IN CRIMINAL CASES.

1. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book II.
When accused persons are to be placed in custody, the Proconsul should
determine whether they should be sent to prison, delivered to a soldier, or
committed to the care of their sureties, or to that of themselves. This is
usually done after taking into consideration the nature of the crime of which
the defendant is accused, or his distinguished rank, or his great wealth, or
his presumed innocence, or his reputation.
2. Papinianus, On Adultery, Book I.
Where a slave is accused of a capital offence, it is provided by the law of
criminal prosecutions that he must furnish security for his appearance in
court, even though his surety be a stranger. If he is not defended in this way,
he should be thrown into the public prison, so that he may defend himself while
under restraint.
(1) Therefore, the question is usually discussed whether the master should
afterwards, by giving security, be permitted to release his slave from
confinement. The Edict of Domitian, by which it is provided that releases
obtained under the Decree of the Senate are not applicable to slaves of this
kind, increases the already existing doubt, for the law itself forbids him to
be discharged before his case has been disposed of. This interpretation, which
is somewhat hard, is too severe when applied to a slave whose master is absent,
or who, through poverty, was at that time unable to furnish security. For it
cannot be said that a slave is left without defence whose master is present, or
is ready to defend him, but is too poor to do so. This can the more readily be
admitted, if too long a time to find security has not been taken.
(2) Those who are required to appear in court on account of some other crime
previously committed are not included in the number of accused persons,
according to a Decree of the Senate. This rule is also observed in private
cases, where the parties have given sureties, unless on this account a
temporary action is in danger of being extinguished through lapse of time.
3. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book VII.
The Divine Pius stated in a Rescript, in Greek, to the people of Antioch, that
anyone who was ready to furnish sureties for his appearance should not be
placed in prison, unless it was evident that he had committed so serious a
crime that he should not be entrusted to the care of any sureties, or soldiers;
but that he must undergo the penalty of imprisonment before suffering that for
the crime of which he is guilty.
4. The Same, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book IX.
Where anyone does not produce a person who is accused of crime, and for whom he
is responsible, he is punished with a pecuniary penalty. I think, however, that
if, through fraud, he does not produce him, he also should arbitrarily be
condemned. But if no certain amount is mentioned in the bond or in the Decree
of the Governor, and custom does not establish it, the Governor must decide
what sum of money must be paid.
5. Venuleius Saturninus, On Public Prosecutions, Book II.
If the defendant has confessed, he should be thrown into prison until sentence
is passed upon him.
6. Marcianus, On Public Prosecutions, Book II.
The Divine Hadrian, in a Rescript addressed to Julius Secundus, made the
following statement: "It has elsewhere been set fortK in a Rescript that no
credit shall be given to the letters of those who send accused persons to the
Governor of a province, as having already been convicted."
The same thing has been provided with reference to Irenarchs,1because it has
been ascertained that all persons do not bring charges against others in good
faith. But a Section of the Imperial Mandate is extant in which the Divine
Pius, at the time when he commanded in the province of Asia, published in the
form of an Edict, that when Irenarchs apprehended thieves they should question
them with reference to their accomplices and associates, and that they should
forward the interrogatories, reduced to writing and sealed, for the examination
of the magistrate. Therefore, those who are sent under such circumstances
should again be heard, even though they had been despatched with letters, or
brought in by the Irenarchs. Thus, the Divine Pius and the other Emperors
stated in Rescripts that proceedings should be taken as in a preliminary
inquiry, even with reference to those who had been accused but not yet
condemned, if anyone appeared to accuse them. Hence when an accusation is made,
the Irenarch is required to appear and prosecute the charge which he has
committed to writing, and if he does so diligently and faithfully, his action
should be approved; but if he produces his evidence with little skill, it
should be simply noted that the Irenarch had rendered an insufficient report.
If, however, it should be ascertained that he has put the questions
maliciously, and has not reported the answers as they were given, an example
should be made of him, in order that he may not afterwards attempt anything of
the same kind.
7. Macer, On the Duties of Governor, Book II.
The Governor of a province in which a crime has been committed is accustomed to
write to his colleagues, where it is said that the guilty parties are, and ask
them to send them to him under guard. This has also been prescribed by certain
rescripts.
8. Paulus, On the Punishments of Soldiers.
If a jailor, having been corrupted with money, permits prisoners to remain in
custody unchained, or allows weapons or poison to be introduced into the
prison, he should be punished by the judge as a part of his official duty; and
if this was done without the knowledge of the jailor, he ought to be removed
from his office for negligence.
9. Venuleius Saturninus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book I.
It is the rule that if soldiers commit a crime, they must be sent back to the
officer under whom they served. The general in chief has a right to punish all
soldiers under his command.
10. The Same, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book II.To prevent anyone from
dismissing prisoners without sufficient reason, it is provided as follows by
the Imperial Mandates: "If you
1 The irenarch was a guardian of the peace, or an official charged with the
maintenance of public order, under the Byzantine Empire. He resembled our
policeman, but his functions were much more extensive, as he was also invested
with a certain degree of magisterial authority. The office was unknown to the
ancient Romans by this designation.---ED.
know that imprisoned persons have been released too soon, and without good
cause by the magistrates, you will order them to be placed in custody, and you
will fine those who released them; for when the magistrates know that they
themselves will be punished if they discharge prisoners too readily, they will
not do so again without proper investigation."
11, Celsus, Digest, Book XXXVII.
There is no doubt that when a man from any province is brought from prison, he
who governs the province where proceedings have been instituted should take
cognizance of the offence.
(1) It is customary for certain judges, when a case has been heard and a
decision rendered, to send the defendant back with the papers to the officer
commanding in the province from which the defendant came. This should only be
done when there is good reason,for it. 12. Callistratus, On Judicial Inquiries,
Book V.If soldiers permit their prisoners to escape, they themselves are
responsible, and run the risk of being punished. For the Divine Hadrian stated
in a Rescript addressed to Statilius Secundus, his deputy, that whenever anyone
escapes from the custody of soldiers, if should be ascertained whether this was
due to gross negligence of the soldiers, or to accident, and whether one among
several, or several fled at the same time; and the soldiers should be delivered
up to punishment when the prisoners escaped from their custody, if this
occurred through gross negligence on their part; otherwise, a decision should
be rendered in proportion to the blame attaching to them.
The same Emperor stated in a Rescript to Salvius, the Governor of Aquitania,
that anyone who permitted a prisoner to escape, or intentionally kept him in
such a way that he could escape, should be punished.
If, however, this occurred through indulgence in wine, or the laziness of the
guard, he should be chastised, and degraded to the lowest military rank. But
where he lost his prisoner through accident, no proceedings should be taken
against him.
(1) When a prisoner escapes from the hands of civilians, I think that the same
investigation should be made which I have mentioned should be done with
reference to soldiers.
13. The Same, On Judicial Inquiries, Book VI.
Where persons who are confined in prison conspire to break their chains and
escape, it has been decided that they must be punished without reference to the
cause for which they were incarcerated. Although they may be found innocent of
the crime for which they were kept in custody, still, they must be punished,
and those who reveal their conspiracy should be released.
14. Herennius Modestinus, On Punishments, Book IV.
A prisoner should not readily be entrusted to a new recruit, for if he escapes,
he who committed the prisoner to his care will be to blame.
(1) The custody of a prisoner should not be committed to one, but
to two guards.
(2) Those who have lost their prisoners through negligence are either punished
in proportion to their fault, or are reduced in rank. If the prisoner was of
little importance, after the soldiers have been chastised, they shall be
restored to their positions; but if anyone releases a prisoner through
compassion, he will lose his rank in the army. If, however, he was guilty of
fraud in letting him go, he is either punished with death, or degraded to the
lowest place in the service. Sometimes he is pardoned, for when a prisoner
flees with one of his guards, pardon is granted to the other.
(3) If the prisoner should kill himself, or precipitate himself from a height,
the soldier will be to blame, that is to say, he will be punished.
(4) If the guard himself should kill the prisoner, he will be guilty
of homicide.
(5) Therefore, if it is alleged that the prisoner died as the result of an
accident, this must be proved by witnesses, and then the guard will be
pardoned.
(6) In addition to this, when the prisoner escaped through the fault of his
guard, if the latter still has an interest in apprehending him, it is
customary, after proper cause is shown, for a certain time to be given him to
look for the fugitive, after having taken another soldier with him.
(7) Where a fugitive slave, who should have been restored to his master, is
allowed to escape, if the person to blame has the means to do so, Saturninus
says he must pay the value of the slave to his master.

* 48.IV. ON THE JULIAN LAW RELATING TO THE CRIME OF LESE MAJESTY.

1. Ulpianus,.On the Duties of Proconsul, Book VII.
The crime of lese majesty may closely resemble that of sacrilege.
(1) The crime of lese majesty is committed against the Roman people, or against
their safety, and he is guilty of it by whose agency measures are maliciously
taken for the death of hostages, without the order of the Emperor; or when men
armed with weapons or stones appear in the city, or are assembled against the
State, and occupy public places or temples; or where assemblies have been
called together, or men convoked for sedition; or where, by the malicious aid
and advice of anyone, plans have been formed by which the magistrates of the
Roman people, or other officials invested with command 6r authority may be
killed; or where anyone bears arms against the government, or sends a messenger
or letter to the enemies of the Roman people, or communicates to them any
password; or commits any act with malicious intent by means of which the
enemies of the Roman
people may be assisted in their designs against the government; or where anyone
solicits or inflames soldiers, in order that a sedition or a tumult may be
excited against the State.

2. The Same, Disputations, Book Vill.
Or when an officer does not depart from a province when his successor arrives;
or deserts from the army; or flees to the enemy as a private individual; or
who, knowing a statement to be false, inserts it in the public records, or
reads it after it has been placed there, for this also is included in the First
Section of the Law of lese majesty.

3. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIV.
The Law of the Twelve Tables directs that anyone who stirs up an enemy, or who
delivers a citizen to him, shall be punished capitally. And the Julian Law on
lese majesty provides that he who injures the dignity of the State shall be
liable, just as one who has submitted to the enemy in war, or occupied a
castle, or surrendered a camp.
He is liable under the same law who engages in hostilities, without the order
of the Emperor; or levies soldiers, or equips an army; or, when his successor
arrives in the province, does not deliver the army to him, or who relinquishes
his command, or deserts the military service of the Roman people; or who, being
a private individual, knowingly and fraudulently performs some act of authority
or magistracy; or causes any of the things above mentioned to be done.

4. Scsevola, Rules, Book IV.
He by whose malicious contrivance anyone is compelled to swear to something
against the State, or the army of the Roman people has been led into ambush or
betrayed to the enemy; or who, with malicious intent, has prevented the enemy
from falling into the power of the Roman people; or by whose agency the enemies
of the Roman people have been furnished with provisions, arms, darts, horses,
money, or anything else; or who has induced friends to become enemies of the
Roman people, or with malicious design, has induced the king of a foreign
nation to be less obedient to the Roman people; or by his malicious schemes has
caused more hostages, money, and beasts of burden to be given to the enemies of
the Roman people, to the injury of his country. Likewise, he who, after the
culprit has confessed his crime in court, and been placed in prison, enables
the latter to escape.
(1) He who melts down statues of the Emperor which have been rejected is
released from liability for this crime by the Senate.

5. Marcianus, Rules, Book V.
He does not commit the crime of lese majesty,who repairs the statues of the
Emperor which have become damaged by age.
(1) Nor does he commit the crime of lese majesty who, having thrown a stone
without aiming at anything, accidentally strikes a statue of the Emperor; and
this was stated by Severus and Antoninus in a Rescript addressed to Julius
Cassianus. The same Emperor
stated in a rescript to Pontius that to sell the statues of the Emperor which
had not yet been consecrated was not lese majesty.

6. Venuleius Saturninus, On Public Prosecutions, Book II.
Those who melt down the statues of the Emperor which have already been
consecrated, or commit any other act of this kind, are liable under the Julian
Law relating to lese majesty.

7. Modestinus, Pandects, Book XII.
Persons who are infamous and have no right to bring an accusation are
undoubtedly permitted to bring this one.
(1) Soldiers, also, who cannot defend other causes, can act in this proceeding;
for as they guard the peace, they, much more than others, should be permitted
to bring this accusation.
(2) Slaves, also, should be heard as accusers in cases of this kind, even
against their masters, as well as freedmen against their patrons.
(3) This accusation, however, should not be considered by judges as affording
an opportunity to show their veneration for the majesty of the Emperor, for
this should only be done where the charge is true; for the personal character
of the accused should be taken in account, and whether he could have committed
the offence, as well as whether he had previously done or planned anything of
the same nature, and also if he was of sane mind, for a slip of the tongue
ought not inconsiderately be held as deserving of punishment. For, although
rash persons ought to be punished, still, they should be excused, just as
lunatics are, when the offence is not included in the strict terms of the law;
or if it should be punished, as resembling one specified by the law.
(4) The crime of lese majesty committed by defacing statues or portraits is much
worse when perpetrated by soldiers.

8. Papinianus, Opinions, Book XIII.
Women are also heard in cases involving lese majesty. A woman named Julia
revealed the conspiracy of Lucius Cataline, and furnished the Consul, Marcus
Tullius, the evidence upon which to base the prosecution.

9. Hermogenianus, The Law, Book V.
The Divine Severus decided that the property of freedmen who have been
convicted of the crime of lese majesty shall be preserved for their children,
and shall be confiscated to the Treasury if no child of the convicted person
should appear.

10. The Same, Epitomes of Law, Book VI.
He can be accused of lese majestyby whose aid, advice, or malicious contrivance
a province or a city has been delivered to the enemy.

11. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book Vill.
He who dies while an accusation against him is pending retains his civil status
unimpaired, for the crime is extinguished by death, unless he was accused of lese majesty; for if he is not cleared of this offence by
his successors, his estate will be forfeited to the Treasury. It is evident
that not everyone accused of lese majestyunder the Julian Law is in this
position, but only he who is guilty of high treason, and is animated by hostile
intent against the State or the Emperor. For if anyone is accused under any
other section of the Julian Law on lese majesty,he will be released from the
charge by death.[fn1]

[fn1] The various forms of attack upon national sovereignty, both direct and
indirect, were not distinguished or classified by the ancient Romans. Its
impersonal character, existing only in the abstract, was not readily conceived
by the mass of the community, which naturally would seek for an individual as
the supreme representative of the power of the State, against whom any violence
or menace to the public welfare would appear to be actually, or presumably
directed. Moreover, the original penal system, embracing the lex talionis,and a
regular series of fines graded according to the seriousness of the injuries
sustained, formulated under the Republic, and largely founded upon the customs
and traditions of past ages, was, to all intents and purposes, merely a means
for the revenge of private wrongs. Centuries elapsed before the idea of lese
majesty,as now understood, came, with the advent of imperialism, to be
recognized as a general principle of Roman polity. In those remote ages the
term perduellio,mentioned in the Law of the Twelve Tables (Tab. IX, Lex. VII),
and afterwards exclusively employed to designate the crime of high treason
known as crimen Isesse majestatis,was applied indiscriminately to every grave
offence tending to disturb the public peace, the destruction of public order by
means of sedition, or interference with the discharge of their functions by any
official of the government and the betrayal of the interests of the State in
general, and the impairment of national sovereignty, rather than to attacks
made directly against the ruler in person as the representative of magisterial
and popular power. This doctrine subsequently extended to include all
disparaging or insulting remarks aimed at the sovereign or at his subordinates
to whom was deputed the exercise of his authority, and the protection of his
honor and dignity, has survived in full force to the present day. Perduellio,a
term originally adopted to denote any serious breach of the law which incurred
the penalty of death, thus afterwards became synonymous with the most
aggravated form of lese majesty;and, by its commission, the culprit, ipso
facto,was transferred from the condition of a Roman citizen to that of an enemy
of the State, involving not only forfeiture of all civil rights, but also, by
the interdiction of fire and water, subjecting him to the fatal consequences of
outlawry.
The Romans restricted the word duellum,or bellum,exclusively to contests with
foreign nations, and considered it inapplicable to any other species of
conflict; domestic disturbance or rebellion not being classed as "warfare"; and
the Twelve Tables, while declaring perduellioto be punishable with death
(capital cstod; capite punitur),did not prescribe the method of inflicting it.
Traitors were at first thrown from the Tarpeian Rock, and afterwards subjected
to scourging; and, as above stated, to the penalty aquee et ignis
interdictio,or practical ostracism and deprivation of the means of existence.
The embodiment and concentration of the authority of the entire mass of
citizens in the occupant of the Imperial throne, which were the natural and
necessary consequences of the establishment of the Empire, gave rise to the
doctrine of liesa majestas,which originally promulgated by Augustus has, as an
indispensable concomitant of all monarchial institutions, and extended and
magnified during subsequent ages, been stigmatized by the legislative power as
the most heinous and unpardonable of crimes, punishable with the severest
penalties that could be devised. "Crimen lassze majestatis omnia alia crimina
excedit quoad pcenam."
During the reign of Arcadius, the rule was extended to include plotting not
only against the life of the Emperor, but also against that of his ministers; a
regulation which has subsequently been productive of deplorable abuses in the
exercise of regal and judicial authority. The extent to which the legal
construction

* 48.V. CONCERNING THE JULIAN LAW FOR THE PUNISHMENT OF ADULTERY.

1. Ulpinanus, On Adultery, Book I.
This law was introduced by the Divine Augustus.
2. The Same, Disputations, Book Vill.
It is provided by the Julian Law that anyone who is required to formulate an
accusation of adultery, because the woman married before she was notified that
she would be accused, cannot bring the charge against her until he has disposed
of the case of the defendant
of this offence, either directly or by implication, was carried by the Emperors
and the Roman jurists, of itself presents an instructive commentary upon the
unbridled despotism, tyranny, and merciless character of the majority of the
Cassara. In addition to being capital, the crime involved confiscation of
property and corruption of blood. Even the death of the culprit did not release
him from the form of trial and conviction; the eternal stigma of infamy
attached to his reputation; and his descendants for generations were declared
incapable of holding property, enjoying civil rights, or associating with their
fellow-creatures upon any other footing than that of outcasts shunned and
despised by all mankind. The intolerable hardship and injustice of visiting the
sins of the parent upon his innocent offspring is thus referred to by the most
able and eloquent of Roman orators: "Nee vero me fugit quam sit aeerbum,
parentum scelera, filiorum poenis lui; sed hoc prxclare legibus comparatum est,
ut caritas liberorum amiciores parentes reipublica redderet."(Cicero, Ad
Brutum12.) The proscription of the descendants of the persons convicted was in
direct contravention of the rule generally applicable to the criminal acts of
ancestors: "Poena ex delicto defuncti, hieres teneri non debet."This
disability, introduced by the Norman conquerors into England, as an incident of
feudalism, was not recognized by the ancient Saxons, among whom treason, in the
ordinary acceptation of the term, denoting an offence against the State, did
not exist; redress being obtained, as in the case of all offences, by means of
the lex talionis,enforced by the relatives of the injured party in accordance
with the right of private revenge, or by the payment of a final sum set forth
in the established schedule of penalties for injuries to person and property;
all offences being considered as subject to reparation by the payment of a
pecuniary mulct, whose amount depended upon the rank and authority of the
victim, as well as upon the reverence with which he was popularly regarded. A
specific punishment for treason, which was also applicable to the lord of the
guilty vassal, was first prescribed by the laws of Alfred. "If anyone plot
against the king's life, of himself, or by harbouring of exiles, or of his men;
let him be liable in his life and in all that he has. If he desires to prove
himself true, let him do so according to the king's 'wer-gild.' So also we
ordain for all degrees, whether 'ceorl' or 'eorl.' He who plots against his
lord's life, let him be liable in his life to him and in all that he has; or
let him prove himself true according to his lord's 'wer.' " (Ancient Laws and
Institutes of England, Alfred's Dooms, 4.)
The great legal compilation of Alfonso X accepts the division of treason by the
Civil Law into Lxsie Majestatis Crimenand Perduellio.The first of these is
subdivided into many heads; the second stands alone, and is defined as an
offence against the King for which punishment could be inflicted after death;
which was not the case with Lsesa Majestas. "Crimen perduellionis en latin,
tanto quiere dezir en romance, como trayzion que se faze contra la persona del
Rey, o contra la pro comunal de toda la tierra; e esta traycion es de tal
natura, que maguer muera el que la fizo, ante que sea acusado, puedenlo acusar
aun despues de su muerte." (Las Siete Partidas,VII, II, III.) Death, with
confiscation of property
and his case is not considered to have been disposed of, unless he has been
convicted.
(1) The following exception can be pleaded against a husband who brings an
accusation in that capacity, namely: "If he is said to have betrayed the law,
in that, after having begun a prosecution for adultery, he has abandoned it."
(2) The crime of pandering is included in the Julian Law on Adultery, as a
penalty has been prescribed against a husband who profits pecuniarily by the
adultery of his wife; as well as against one who retains his wife after she has
been taken in adultery.
(3) Moreover, he who permits his wife to commit this offence, holds his
marriage in contempt; and where anyone who does not become in-
and corruption of blood, was the penalty imposed for the commission of either.
(Ibid.,II, II.)
During the infancy of the English law, high treason was a crime much more
limited in scope than it eventually became under the manifold refinements of
subsequent legislation. "Ipsum accusatum machinatum fuisse vel^ aliquid fecisse
in mortem Regis vel seditione Regni, vel exercitus, vel consensisse, vel
consilium didiscisse, vel authoritatem prestitisse."(Glanvil, Tractatus de
Legibus ConsuetU-dinibus Anglise,XIV, I.)
"Habet enim crimen Isesie majestatis sub se multas species, quarum vna est, vt
si quis ausu temerario machinatus sit in mortem domini regis, vel aliquid
egerit vel agi procurauerit ad seditionem domini regis vel exercitus sui, vel
procuranti-bus auxilium & consilium prasbuerit vel consensum, licet id quod in
volutate hab-uerit non parduxerit ad effectum."(Bracton, De Legibus et
Consuetudinibus Angliai,III, 118.)
Numerous acts declared to be treasonable were subsequently enumerated by the
Statute de Proditionibus.(25 Edw. Ill, st. 5, chap. 2.) "To compass or imagine
the Death of the King, Queen, or Prince; to violate the Queen, the King's
eldest Daughter unmarried, or the Prince's Wife; to levy War against the King,
or adhere to his Enemies within the Realm, giving them Aid or Comfort within
the Realm, or elsewhere; to Counterfeit the King's Great Seal or Privy Seal, or
his Money; to bring false Money into this Realm, counterfeit according to the
Money of England (knowing the said Money to be false) to Merchandize or make
Payment with it; to kill the Chancellor, Treasurer, or any Justice of either
Bench, Justices in Eyre, Justices of Assize, or any other justices assigned to
hear and determin, being in their Places doing their Offices; is by this
Statute declared to be High Treason; and in the said Cases that ought to be
adjudged Treason, which extends to the King, or his Royal Majesty." To these
provisions have since been added others relating to the succession, the
marriage of the Queen Regnant, and the intimidation of the House of Parliament.
It is indispensable for the intention to commit the crime to be accompanied by
some overt act, in order for criminal liability to be incurred. The flagrant
abuses growing out of prosecutions for alleged acts of treason, practiced and
encouraged by tyrannical and unscrupulous princes in the gratification of
private animosity, the indulgence of religious prejudice, and the furtherance
of unjustifiable ambition, are a blot on the jurisprudence of England.
Attainder and felony which always followed sentence of death in cases of
treason, was, for centuries, encouraged by the authorities, as affording a
profitable source of wealth through the forfeiture of estates, regardless of
the suffering entailed upon the innocent family of the criminal. (VidePike, A
History of Crime in England, I, Pages 229, 488, 500.)
The king alone could, in former times, remove the disabilities of children
resulting from the taint attaching to the conviction of a parent guilty of high
treason. "Qusere sil pleist al roy de pardoner loffendour, si ceo voile toller
le corrup-
dignant on account of such pollution, the penalty for adultery is not
inflicted.
(4) Anyone who alleges that he has committed adultery with the assistance of
the husband, desires, indeed, to lessen his crime, but an excuse of this kind
is not admitted. Therefore, if the defendant should wish to denounce the
husband for having acted as a pander, he shall not be heard, if he has once
been accused.
(5) If a husband should attempt to prosecute his wife in a criminal case, will
the allegation of having acted as her pander bar him from bringing the
accusation ? I think that it will not. Therefore the act of the husband in a
case of this kind renders him liable, but does not excuse his wife.
tion del sangue, de ceux queux sount nees & procreates deuant le pardon, auxi
auaunt la, come il fait de ceux queux sont procreates puis le pardo."(Staund-
forde, Les Plees del Cor on,III, 34.) Attainder, corruption of blood, and
forfeiture of every description, in cases of conviction for treason and felony,
were absolutely abolished by Stat. 32, 33, Vict., c. 23.
The barbarity of the ancient sentence for high treason in England has probably
never been exceeded anywhere, certainly not among civilized nations. The
convicted traitor was dragged to the place of execution; he was then hanged and
cut down before death ensued; he was disembowelled and his entrails and private
parts burned before his face; he was finally beheaded and quartered; and his
remains placed at the disposal of the King, who generally ordered them to be
suspended from a gibbet, as a solemn warning to other malefactors. "Le
iudgement dun home qui est conuict de haut treason est destre reamesne al lieu
dont il vyent, & de la destre trahe fur vn hurdle, iesque al lieu dexecution, &
la destre pendus per le colle, & viue destre decoupe, et ces intrailes & priuy
members, destre excises de son corps, & combures deins son vieu, & son teste
destr' abscise, & s9 corps deuide in quater parts, a disponer al voluntie le
Roye."(Staundforde, Les Plees del CoronIII, 19.)
The most deplorable and unjust consequence of a conviction of treason at Common
Law was attainder, which not only involved the forfeiture of all the property
of the culprit to the King, but imposed lasting disability upon his heirs and
other members of his family, excluding them from the rights of inheritance,
retention, and transfer of estates; incapacitating them from holding office;
and forever subjecting them to public execration.
The punishment of women at Common Law was somewhat less severe. "The judgment
of a woman for high treason is to be drawn and burnt." (Coke, Institutes, III,
101.)
The original cruel sentence for high treason was abolished in 1814; but the
body of the traitor could still be mutilated after death. (VideStephen,
Commentaries on the Laws of England, Vol. IV, Page 144.)
Under what is known as the Forfeiture Act, passed in 1870, hanging is now the
penalty for treason, for which the king, in the exercise of his discretion, can
substitute decapitation.
"Treason against the United States shall consist only in levying War against
them, or in adhering to their Enemies, giving them Aid and Comfort."
(Constitution, Art. 3, Sec. 3.) It is a remarkable fact, often referred to by
legal writers, that this is the only offence of which a definition is given by
the Constitution of the United States. It was adopted bodily from Stat. 25,
Edw. Ill, cap. 3, enacted about the middle of the Fourteenth Century, and which
forms the basis of all subsequent English legislation on the subject.
The doctrine that, in cases of treason, all conspirators are principals, is not
unqualifiedly admitted by the Constitution, as the mere advice or suggestion to
levy war by one or more of them, when no overt act takes place in consequence,
(6) Hence it may be asked whether he who has cognizance of the prosecution for
adultery can decide against the husband because of his having acted as a
pander? I think that he can do so. For Claudius Gorgus, a most illustrious man,
having accused his wife, and it having been ascertained that although he had
caught her in adultery he still kept her, was condemned by the Divine Severus
for being guilty of pandering, without any accuser having appeared against him.
(7) But if a stranger, after having been accused, alleges that the husband was
guilty of pandering, he does not diminish his own crime, nor does he subject
the husband to a penalty.
(8) If the husband and the father of the woman appear at the same time for the
purpose of accusing her, the question arises, which of them should be given the
preference by the Prsetor ? The better opinion is, that the husband should be
entitled to the preference, for it may well be believed that he will prosecute
the accusation with greater anger and vexation. This is so far true, that even
where the father has already appeared, and filed the papers containing the
accusation, if the husband has not been negligent or guilty of delay, but is
himself prepared to bring the accusation, and introduce evidence, and fortify
it, in order that the case may be the more easily proved before the judges, the
same thing must be said.
(9) But whenever others who have the right to bring the charge after the
husband and the father hasten to do so; it is stated by the law that he who has
jurisdiction of the case must determine who shall be the accuser.
3. The Same, On Adultery, Book II.
Therefore, unless the father proves that the husband is infamous, or shows that
he was in collusion with his wife rather than that he actually intends to
accuse her, he must give place to the husband.
4. The Same, Disputations, Book Vill.
If the husband has appeared and brought the accusation, the time does not run
against the father to prevent him from prosecuting it; still, until one of them
institutes proceedings, the time, will run against both; but, indeed, when the
husband begins to prosecute, the remaining time does not run against the person
who cannot do so. This may be said with reference to anyone who begins
proceedings against the
does not constitute the offence; and even if war should result, it must be
shown that it ensued directly by reason of such advice. Various conditions
which have arisen since the adoption of the Constitution have modified and
extended the application of the term treason in this country, as is disclosed
by supplementary enactments and the trend of judicial decisions. (VideWharton,
A Treatise on Criminal Law, Secs. 2138, 2139.)
In the United States, the penalty for treason is death, or imprisonment for not
less than five years and a fine of not less than ten thousand dollars, at the
discretion of the court. Conviction also involves disability to hold office.
(Barnes, Federal Code, Sec. 9672.)
While the Constitution authorizes the attainder and forfeiture of property of
anyone found guilty of treason, this only applies during the life of the
culprit, and
adulterer or the adulteress, for the time ceases to run against the person who
is not made the object of the accusation. This applies to husbands and fathers.
(1) The power of bringing the accusation after the husband and the father is
granted to strangers who have a right to do so; for, after sixty days have
elapsed, four months, and even available ones, are granted to strangers.
(2) If a stranger was the first one to bring the accusation, the question
arises whether, if the husband appears, he can be permitted to accuse the
woman. I think that the better opinion is that, in this instance, the husband
should be heard if he has not been guilty of negligence. Therefore, even if the
accusation has been begun by a stranger, and the woman should be acquitted, the
husband ought, nevertheless, to be permitted to renew the accusation; provided
he can allege good reasons by which he was prevented from bringing it
previously.
5. Julianus, Digest, Book LXXXVI.
There is no doubt that a woman whom I have married can be prosecuted for
adultery committed during her first marriage, as it is clearly provided by the
Julian Law for the punishment of adultery that, if proceedings for this offence
are brought against a woman who is a widow, the accuser has the choice of
accusing either the adulterer or adulteress first, whichever he prefers; but if
the woman is married, he must first prosecute the adulterer and then the woman.
. 6. Papinianus, On Adultery, Book I.
The Julian Law only applies to free persons who have been the victims of
adultery or debauchery. With reference to female slaves, recourse can easily be
had to the action authorized by the Aquilian Law, and that for injury will also
lie, and the Praetorian action for the corruption of a slave will not be
refused; so that the person guilty of this crime will not escape on account of
the multiplicity of actions. (1) The law promiscuously and incorrectly
designates the same crime by the terms debauchery and adultery. Properly
speaking, adultery is only committed with a married woman; this name having
been adopted on account of the child being begotten by another than the
husband. Debauchery, which the Greeks call "corruption," is committed with a
virgin, or a widow.
corruption of blood is expressly prohibited. (Art. Ill, Sec. 3.) No bill of
attainder can be passed. (Art. II, Sec. 9.)
The nations of continental Europe, in general, make the same distinction
between treason perpetrated against the person of the sovereign, and
conspiracy, or attempt to overthrow the government, as laid down by the Roman
jurists; imposing a graduated scale of penalties dependent upon the guilt of
the accused. (Allgemeines Strafgesetz,Arts. 58-66 (Austria); Strafgesetzbuch
fur das Deutsche Reich,Arts. 80-91 (Germany) ; Wetbock van Strafrecht,Arts. 92-
114 (Holland) ; Almindelig borgerlig Straffelov,Secs. 71-116 (Denmark) ;
Sveriges Hikes Lag, Kap.Vill, IX (Sweden) ; Code Penal de France,Arts. 75-113;
Codigo Penal de Espana,Arts. 136-187, Codice Penale del Regna d'ltalia,Arts.
104-127; Code des Lois Pennies Beiges,Arts. 113-136; Codigo Penal
Portuguez,Arts. 141-182.)---ED.
(2) A son under paternal control, who is a husband, is not, by this law,
distinguished from one who is his own master. The Divine Hadrian stated in a
Rescript addressed to Rosianus Geminus, that even without the consent of his
father, a son under paternal control could bring an accusation under this law.
(3) The husband, although he may be already prosecuting two persons for another
crime, can, by his marital right, accuse a third party, because this case is
not included among the others.
7. Marcianus, Institutes, Book X,
A man who contracts matrimony with his own female ward in violation of the
Decree of the Senate is not legally married; and he who was her guardian or
curator can be prosecuted for adultery if he marries a girl under twenty-six
years of age who has not been betrothed to him, or destined for him, or
mentioned for this purpose in a will.
(1) Marcianus, in the Second Book On Adultery, by Papinianus, states that a
common accusation for incest can be brought at the same time against the two
persons concerned.
8. Papinianus, On Adultery, Book II.
Anyone who knowingly lends his house to enable debauchery or adultery to be
committed there with a matron who is not his wife, or with a male, or who
pecuniarily profits by the adultery of his wife, no matter what may be his
status, is punished as an adulterer.
(1) It is clear that by the term "house" every kind of habitation is meant.
9. Ulpianus, On Adultery, Book IV.
Anyone who lends the house of a friend is also liable.
(1) Where anyone encourages the commission of debauchery in a field, or in a
bath, he should be included in the law.
(2) When, however, persons are accustomed to assemble in some house for the
purpose of making arrangements to commit adultery, even if it was not committed
in that place, still, the owner is considered to have lent his house for the
commission of debauchery or adultery, because these offences would not have
been perpetrated if these meetings had not taken place.
10. Papinianus, On Adultery, Book II.
A matron means not only a married woman, but also a widow.
(1) Women who lend their houses, or have received any compensation for
debauchery which they have committed, are also liable under this Section of the
law.
(2) A woman who gratuitously acts as a bawd for the purpose of avoiding the
penalty for adultery, or hires her services to appear in the theatre, can be
accused and convicted of adultery under the Decree of the Senate.
11. The Same, On Adultery.
A soldier who has compromised with the seducer of his wife should be released
from his oath, and be deported.
(1) It has very properly been decided that a soldier who lives in concubinage
with his sister's daughter, although this is not marriage, will be liable to
punishment for adultery.
(2) A woman who is classed among those who have committed adultery cannot be
defended in court while she is absent.
(3) A father-in-law who, in a written accusation filed with the Governor,
stated that he accused his daughter-in-law of adultery, preferred to abandon
the accusation and obtain her dowry. The question arises whether you think that
a scheme of this kind should be permitted. The answer was, that it is a very
dishonorable example for a person, after he has brought an accusation against
his daughter-in-law, to desire to abandon it, and remain content with the
profit obtained from her dowry, as the marriage was dissolved through the fault
of the woman. Wherefore he will not be unjustly barred who was not ashamed to
prefer the advantage of the dowry to avenging the honor of his house.
(4) It is clear that anyone guilty of adultery can be prosecuted within five
years from the time when the crime was committed, even though the woman should
be dead.
(5) A certain person desired to accuse a woman of adultery, and asked that the
days which he had passed in prison should not be counted against him. I, having
agreed to this, another contradicted me; and, if you approve of his opinion, I
ask you to write to me after careful consideration of the question. The answer
was, that both the terms and the intention of the law sustain your conclusion;
for it has been decided that only available days should be counted against the
accuser, that is to say, those in which he can comply with the formalities
required by the accusation. Therefore, undoubtedly, when you hold that the days
during which the complainant was in prison are not to be included among those
available days, no reason exists for opposing your opinion.
(6) The sixty days that are counted as available and in which the husband can
bring the accusation certainly include festivals, provided the accuser has the
power of appearing before the Governor, because the information can be given to
the latter even when he is not on the bench. If, however, he has lost this
privilege, he is not prevented from filing his complaint with the judge during
the other four months.
(7) The question arose whether a man could, by the right of a husband, accuse a
woman who had been betrothed to him, and had afterwards been given in marriage
by her father to another. The answer was, I think, that the accuser, in a case
of this kind, institutes a new proceeding when he desires to bring a charge of
adultery, for this reason only, that the girl who had been betrothed to him was
afterwards given by her father in marriage to another.
(8) A woman can be prosecuted for adultery after the death of her husband.
(9) Should a woman who asks for delay on account of the youth of her son obtain
it from the accuser, or ought she to be heard? I answered: This woman does not
seem to have a just defence who offers the age of her son as a pretext for
evading a legal accusation. For the charge of adultery brought against her does
not prejudice the child, since she herself may be an adulteress, and the child
still have the deceased for his father.
(10) When I desired to accuse a woman of adultery who, after having committed
the offence, continued in the same marital relation, my position was disputed.
I ask whether the opinion was correct. The answer was: "You should not have
been ignorant that, during the marriage which existed when the adultery was
said to have been committed, the woman could not have been prosecuted for
adultery, and that during this time the adulterer himself could not have been
accused."
(11) Although a woman may be alleged to have married him with whom she is
suspected of having committed adultery, she cannot be accused before the
adulterer has been convicted. Otherwise, husbands desiring to have marriages,
which have subsequently been contracted, annulled, would have recourse to this
pretext, and say that their wives had married men with whom they had committed
adultery.
(12) A woman, having heard that her absent husband was dead, married another,
and her first husband afterwards returned. I ask, what should be decided with
reference to this woman ? The answer was that the question is one of law and
not of fact; for if a long time had elapsed without any proof of debauchery
having been made, and the woman, having been induced by false rumors, and, as
it were, released from her former tie, married a second time in accordance with
law, as it is probable that she was deceived, and she can be held to have done
nothing deserving of punishment. If, however, it is established that the
supposed death of her husband furnished an inducement for her marrying a second
time, as her chastity is affected by this fact, she should be punished in
proportion to the character of the offence.
(13) I married a woman accused of adultery, and, as soon as she was convicted,
I repudiated her. I ask whether I should be considered to have furnished the
cause of the separation. The answer was that, since by the Julian Law you are
prohibited from keeping a wife of this kind, it is clear that you should not be
considered to have furnished the cause for the separation. Therefore, the law
will be applied just as if a divorce had taken place through the fault of the
woman.
12. Ulpianus, On Adultery, Book II.
These words of the law, namely, "In order that no one may, knowingly and
fraudulently, commit debauchery or adultery," are applicable both to him who
advised it, and to him who committed the act of debauchery or adultery.
13. The Same, On Adultery, Book II.
Where a wife did not commit adultery, but a concubine did, the husband cannot
accuse her as such, because she is not his wife; still, he is not prohibited by
law from bringing an accusation as a stranger, provided that she, in giving
herself as a concubine, did not forfeit the name of a matron, as, for instance,
a woman who had been the concubine of her patron.
(1) It is clear that, whether the woman is a lawful wife or not, her husband
can bring the accusation against her; for Sextus Csecilius states that this law
is applicable to all marriages; and he quotes the passage from Homer where he
says the Atrides are not the only ones who love their wives.
(2) A husband can prosecute his wife for adultery when she has committed it
publicly, although if she were a widow, debauchery could be committed by her
with impunity.
(3) The Divine Severus and Antoninus stated in a Rescript, that this offence
could even be prosecuted in the case of a woman who was betrothed, because she
is not permitted to violate any marriage whatever, nor even the hope of
matrimony.
(4) Where, however, she is a person with whom incest has been committed, or a
woman who is kept as a wife, but still cannot be one in reality, it must be
said that the husband cannot, as such, accuse her, but he can do so as a
stranger.
(5) The judge who has jurisdiction of adultery must have before his eyes, and
investigate whether the husband, living modestly, has afforded his wife the
opportunity of having good morals; for it would be considered extremely unjust
for the husband to require chastity for his wife, which he himself does not
practice. This, indeed, may condemn the husband, but cannot afford a set-off
for mutual crime when committed by both parties.
(6) If anyone wishes to accuse his wife, and alleges that she committed
adultery before he married her, he cannot bring the accusation by his right as
a husband, because she did not commit adultery while she was married to him.
This can also be said with reference to a concubine whom the man who kept her
subsequently married; or with reference to a daughter under paternal control,
to whose union her father afterwards gave his consent.
(7) If anyone should openly accuse his wife of having committed adultery, while
he was a prisoner in the hands of the enemy, it would be more indulgent to hold
that he can accuse her by the right of a husband; but her husband cannot
prosecute her for adultery, if she suffered violence from the enemy. For anyone
who is violated cannot be convicted of adultery or fornication on this account.
(8) Where a girl, less than twelve years old, brought into the house of her
husband, commits adultery, and afterwards remains with him until she has passed
that age, and begins to be his wife; she cannot be accused of adultery by her
husband, for the reason that she
committed it before reaching the marriageable age; but, according to a Rescript
of the Divine Severus, which is mentioned above, she can be accused as having
been betrothed.
(9) If a woman who has been repudiated should afterwards be taken back by her
husband, not in order to continue the first marriage, but under another which
has taken place, let us see whether she can be accused of the crime which she
committed during her first marriage. I think that she cannot be, for her
husband, by taking her back, has done away with all the crimes of the first
marriage.
(10) The same rule must be adopted, if he desires to accuse of fornication the
woman whom he afterwards married; for he is too late when he bases his
accusation on conduct which he approved by marrying her.
14. Scsevola, Rules, Book IV.
He who, by aid, advice, or fraud, causes a man or a woman who has been taken in
adultery to be released, either in consideration of the payment of money, or on
account of any kind of an agreement, shall suffer the same penalty which is
imposed upon those convicted of the crime of pandering.
(1) If a husband, for the purpose of defaming his wife, provides her with an
adulterer, in order that he may catch them, both the husband and the wife are
guilty of the crime of adultery, according to a decree of the Senate enacted
with reference to this subject.
(2) The husband, in the first place, or the father, who has his daughter under
his control, is permitted to bring an accusation within sixty days of the
divorce, and the power to do this is not granted to anyone else within that
time, and, after it has elapsed, the desire of either party will not be
considered.
(3) Those who prosecute by the right of a husband are not free from the risk of
false accusation.
15. Ulpianus, On Adultery, Book II.
If the husband is a magistrate, the father can precede him in bringing the
accusation, but it is not necessary for him to do so. Pomponius thinks that it
should be held that, as long as the husband retains his office, action by the
father should be prevented, to avoid depriving the husband of a right to which
he also is entitled. Therefore the sixty days do not run against the father, as
he cannot bring the accusation.
(1) It is provided by the Seventh Section of the Julian Law with reference to
Adultery, that no one can include in the number of accused persons anyone who
is absent on business for the State, without invalidating the judgment. For it
does not seem just for a person who is absent on public business to be numbered
among the accused, when he is in the employ of the government.
(2) It is necessary to add, "without invalidating the judgment." But if anyone
should be absent on public business, for the purpose of avoiding prosecution,
this pretext will not be of any advantage to him.
(3) If, however, anyone is present who still is considered absent, for
instance, a person who belongs to the night-watch, or who is serving as a
soldier in the city camps, it must be said that he cannot be accused, for he is
not compelled to trouble himself to appear.
(4) Generally speaking, it should be held that only the absence of those is
excusable who are in another province of the country than that in which they
are accused. Hence, if anyone commits adultery in a province in which he is
employed, he can be accused there, unless he is a person over whom the Governor
has no jurisdiction.
(5) If the father and the husband fail to accuse the woman within sixty days,
will the time immediately begin to run in favor of a stranger ? Pomponius
thinks that a stranger can be permitted to bring the accusation as soon as the
others have refused to do so. I think that his opinion should be adopted, for
it can be said even more decidedly that he who has stated that he will not
bring the accusation ought not afterwards to be heard.
(6) The Julian Law relating to Adultery especially prohibits accusation by
certain persons, as, for instance, by a minor of twenty-five years of age, for
an accuser is not considered capable who is not yet of mature age. This is
correct, if he does not prosecute an injury to his own marriage. But if he
desires to vindicate the honor of his own marriage, although he may bring the
accusation by the right of a stranger, he should still be heard; for no
prescription ought to bar anyone who avenges his own injury. And, indeed, if
induced by the alacrity of youth, or inflamed by the fervor of maturity, he
hastens to bring the accusation, the penalty for malicious prosecution will not
hastily be inflicted upon him.
We understand a minor of twenty-five years of age to be one who is in his
twenty-fifth year.
(7) The prescriptions which it is customary to introduce against persons
bringing the accusation of adultery are usually discussed before the party
implicated has been included in the number of those accused, but when this once
has taken place, he cannot plead prescription.
(8) If a woman remains in widowhood, the accuser has the right to begin with
either party he wishes, with the adulterer or the adulteress.
(9) If anyone accuses the adulterer and the adulteress at the same time, the
accusation is void, and he can begin again with either party whom he may
select, just as if he had accused neither, because the first accusation is of
no force or effect.
16. The Same, On Adultery, Book I.
Anyone who has served notice of repudiation upon his wife can also notify her
not to marry Seius, and if he has notified her, he can begin with her.
17. The Same, On the Julian Law Relating to Adultery, Book II.
What should we understand the term "notify" to mean? Does it mean an
application to the court, or merely an ordinary notice? I
think that if application is not made to the court, it will be sufficient for
him to state that he is about to bring an accusation for adultery.
(1) What then should be done, if he did not serve notice, but filed a written
accusation before the woman married again; and she should marry, whether he was
aware of this fact, or did not know it? I think that she should not be
considered as notified, and therefore that the accuser cannot begin with her.
(2) But what if he only notified her not to marry, but did not add why; shall
she be considered to be legally married? The better opinion is, to hold that
the notice seems to reserve the choice for the prosecutor who brings the
accusation. Therefore if he mentions the crime of adultery in the notice, even
if he did not give the name of the judge, we think that the woman can be
accused, just as if the notice had been served.
(3) What, however, would be the result if, in the notice, it was stated
specifically with whom she had committed adultery, and the complainant should
afterwards wish to accuse her of adultery with someone else? The better opinion
is, that he ought not to be heard, for he does not bring the accusation for the
crime mentioned in the notice.
(4) If, however, he serves notice by an agent, I think that he can bring the
accusation if he desires to do so; and that the notice by the agent will be
sufficient.
(5) Therefore, if he serves notice by his steward, that is to say, if a master
serves notice by his slave, it will be valid.
(6) The question arises whether one person can prosecute the adulteress, and
another the adulterer; so that, although both cannot be prosecuted at the same
time by the same person, they can each be accused by a different individual. It
is not reasonable to adopt the opinion that different accusers can be permitted
to prosecute, for if the woman should marry before having been notified, she
cannot be accused first; hence she must wait for the decision to be rendered
with reference to the adulterer. If he should be acquitted, the woman will gain
her case through him, and cannot afterwards be accused. If he should be
convicted, she will not, for this reason, be condemned, but she can defend her
case, and perhaps gain it either by favor, justice, or the assistance of the
law. For what if the adulterer was oppressed by the efforts of an enemy, or by
false testimony, or was overwhelmed by suborned witnesses before the court, or
was either unwilling or unable to take an appeal, and the woman, having
obtained an upright judge, defended her chastity?
(7) But if the adulterer, before he was convicted,
18. Macer, On Public Prosecutions, Book I.
Or before the accusation was brought against him,
19. Ulpianus, On the Julian Law Relating to Adultery, Book II.
Should die, it has been decided that even if he was dead, the woman could be
accused without being able to plead an exception.
(1) If, however, not death, but some penalty imposed upon him should remove the
defendant, we say that the woman can still be prosecuted.
(2) If at the time when the person to be prosecuted was chosen, the adulteress
was not married, but was married when he was acquitted, it must be said that
even if the adulterer was acquitted she could still be accused, because she was
not married at the time when the adulterer was selected to be prosecuted first.
(3) If the adulterer should be acquitted, a married woman cannot be accused,
even by the person who prosecuted the adulterer and was defeated, nor can she
be accused by anyone else. Hence, if the accuser should be in collusion with
the adulterer, and the latter is acquitted, he renders the married woman secure
against prosecution brought by anyone. It is clear that she can be accused if
she should cease to be married, for the law only protects a woman as long as
she is married.
20. Papinianus, On Adultery, Book I.
The right is granted to the father to kill a man who commits adultery with his
daughter while she is under his control. Therefore no other relative can
legally do this, nor can a son under paternal control, who is a father, do so
with impunity.
21. Ulpianus, On Adultery, Book I,
Hence it happens that neither the father nor the grandfather can kill the
adulterer. This is not unreasonable, for he cannot be considered to have anyone
under his control who has not control of himself.
22. Papinianus, On Adultery, Book I.
In this law, the natural father is not distinguished from the adoptive father.
(1) In the accusation of his daughter, who is a widow, the father is not
entitled to the preference.
(2) The right to kill the adulterer is granted to the father in his own house,
even though his daughter does not live there, or in the house of his son-in-
law. The house should be understood to mean the residence, as in the Cornelian
Law relating to injuries.
(3) He, however, who can kill an adulterer, has a much greater right to treat
him with contumely.
(4) Hence the father, and not the husband, has the right to kill the woman and
every adulterer; for the reason that, in general, paternal affection is
solicitous for the interests of the children, but the heat and impetuosity of
the husband, who decides too quickly, should be restrained.
23. Ulpianus, On Adultery, Book I.
What the law says, that is, "If he finds a man committing adultery with his
daughter," does not seem to be superfluous; for it signifies that the father
shall have this power only when he surprises his daughter in the very act of
adultery. Labeo also adopts this opinion;
and Pomponius says that the man must be killed while in the very performance of
the sexual act. This is what Solon and Dracho mean by the words, "epv<?>."
(1) It is sufficient for the father for his daughter to be subject to his
authority at the time when he kills the adulterer, although she may not have
been at the time when he gave her in marriage; for suppose that she had
afterwards come under his control.
(2) Therefore the father shall not be permitted to kill the parties wherever he
surprises them, but only in his own house, or in that of his son-in-law. The
reason for this is, that the legislator thought that the injury was greater
where the daughter caused the adulterer to be introduced into the house of her
father or her husband.
(3) If, however, her father lives elsewhere, and has another house in which he
does not reside, and surprises his daughter there, he cannot kill her.
(4) Where the law says, "He may kill his daughter at once;" this must be
understood to mean that having to-day killed the adulterer he can not reserve
his daughter to be killed subsequently; for he should kill both of them with
one blow and one attack, and be inflamed by the same resentment against both.
But if, without any connivance on his part, his daughter should take to flight,
while he is killing the adulterer, and she should be caught and put to death
some hours afterwards by her father, who pursued her, he will be considered to
have killed her immediately.
24. Macer, Public Prosecutions, Book I.
A husband is also permitted to kill a man who commits adultery with his wife,
but not everyone without distinction, as the father is; for it is provided by
this law that the husband can kill the adulterer if he surprises him in his own
house, but not if he surprises him in the house of his father-in-law; nor if he
was formerly a pander; or had exercised the profession of a mountebank, by
dancing or singing on the stage; or had been convicted in a criminal
prosecution and not been restored to his civil rights; or is the freedman of
the husband or the wife, or of the father or mother, or of the son or the
daughter of any of them; nor does it make any difference whether he belonged
exclusively to one of the persons above mentioned, or owed services to two
patrons in common, or was a slave.
(1) It is also provided that a husband who has killed any one of these must
dismiss his wife without delay.
(2) It is held by many authorities to make no difference whether the husband is
his own master, or a son under paternal control.
(3) With reference to both parties, the question arises, in accordance with the
spirit of the law, whether the father can kill a magistrate; and also where his
daughter is of bad reputation, or has been illegally married, whether the
father or the husband will still retain his right; and what should be done if
the husband is a pander, or is branded with ignominy for some reason or other.
It may properly be
held that those have a right to kill who can bring an accusation as a father or
a husband.
25. Ulpianus, On the Julian Law Relating to Adultery, Book II.
It is provided as follows in the Fifth Section of the Julian Law: "That where a
husband has surprised an adulterer with his wife, and is either unwilling or
unable to kill him, he can hold him for not more than twenty consecutive hours
of the day and night, in order to obtain evidence of the crime, and make use of
his right without endangering it."
(1) I think that what has been stated with reference to the husband should be
observed, so far as the father is concerned.
(2) Even if the husband should not surprise the adulterer in his house, he can
hold him.
(3) Where, however, the adulterer is immediately released, he cannot be brought
back.
(4) What must be done if he escapes; can he be brought back and kept under
guard for twenty hours? I think that it is better to hold that he can be
brought back and guarded for the purpose of obtaining evidence.
(5) The following clause, "In order to obtain evidence of the crime," means
that he can introduce witnesses who will afterwards testify that the offender
was taken in adultery.
26. The Same, Disputations, Book HI.
A woman cannot be accused of adultery during marriage by anyone who, in
addition to the husband, is permitted to bring the accusation; for a stranger
should not annoy a wife who is approved by her husband, and disturb a quiet
marriage, unless he has previously accused the husband of being a pander.
(1) When, however, the charge has been abandoned by the husband, it is proper
for it to be prosecuted by another.
27. The Same, On Adultery, Book HI.
When an accuser demands that a slave charged with adultery shall be put to
torture, whether he himself intends to be present or not, the judges shall
order the slave to be appraised; and when this has been done, they must direct
that he who has denounced the slave as guilty shall pay the amount of the
appraisement, and as much more, to the party interested.
(1) Let us, however, consider to whom this penalty should be paid, as the law
mentions the party in interest. Thus, a bona fidepurchaser is such a person;
and although he may have bought the slave from one who is not his owner, we can
properly say that he is the party in interest.
(2) We will do well to include in the same category one who has received
property in pledge; because it is to his interest that the torture should not
take place.
(3) When, however, the usufruct of the slave belongs to another, his appraised
value should be divided between the owner and the usufructuary.
(4) If the slave is owned in common by several persons, his estimated value
should be divided among them.
(5) When a freeman, supposed to be a slave, is tortured for the reason that he
himself is ignorant of his condition, Csecilius is of the opinion that he is
entitled to a praetorian action against the person who falsely accused him, in
order that he may not go unpunished for having subjected a freeman to torture,
just as if he had been a slave.
(6) The law directs that torture shall be applied to the male or female slaves
of the man or woman complained of, or to those of the parents of either of
them; if the said slaves have been given to the accused by his or her parents
for their own use.
The Divine Hadrian stated in a Rescript addressed to Cornelius Latianus that
the slaves of strangers should be tortured.
(7) The man and woman who are accused, their patrons, and the person who has
brought the accusation, are ordered to be present at the torture, and the power
of questioning is granted to the patrons.
(8) It is still more advisable that a slave in whom the accused person had the
usufruct should be tortured, for although he was not actually his slave, he is
still considered to have been in servitude; for in everything relating to
torture the question of ownership is not so much involved as the fact of the
service.
(9) Therefore, if a slave belonging to another serves the accused in good
faith, anyone will admit that he can be interrogated while undergoing torture.
(10) Where, however, the slave is one who is entitled to his freedom under the
terms of a trust, or who expects to be free on compliance with a condition, the
better opinion is that he can be tortured.
(11) The law directs that slaves who have been put to the torture in this
manner shall become public property; hence we confiscate a part of a slave
owned in common, and the mere ownership of one in whom another enjoys the
usufruct; and where the accused has only the usufruct, the better opinion is
that the enjoyment of the usufruct begins to belong to the government; but we
do not confiscate a slave who is the property of another.
The reason for the confiscation of slaves is that they may tell the truth
without fear; while, if they were apprehensive of again being brought under the
power of the accused persons, they might become obdurate under torture.
(12) They are not, however, confiscated before being subjected to torture.
(13) Even if they should deny everything, they will, nevertheless, be
confiscated. The reason for this is the same, as well as to prevent them from
entertaining the hope of again coming under the control of their masters, if
they should make denials with the expectation of being rewarded for
perseverence in uttering falsehoods.
(14) Even the slaves of the accuser are confiscated, if they are put to the
torture. For slaves of this kind should be taken from their masters to prevent
them from lying, but those of strangers have no one to please.
(15) When the accused party of either sex is acquitted, the law provides that,
if the slaves should die, the loss shall be estimated by the judges, according
to what they were worth before being tortured; and if they live, to an amount
in proportion to the damage caused or inflicted upon them.
(16) It must be noted that it is provided by the Ninth Section, when a slave is
charged with adultery, and the accuser does not wish him to be put to torture,
the law orders double his value to be paid to his master; but this is simple
damages.
28. Marcianus, On Public Prosecutions, Book I.
Anything which may be due in these different cases can be recovered by a
personal action derived from the law.
29. Ulpianus, On Adultery, Book IV.
The law punishes the pandering of a husband who retains his wife, after she has
been surprised in adultery, and permits the adulterer to depart. For the
husband should be angry against his wife who has violated her marriage vow, and
he ought also to be punished when he cannot excuse his ignorance, or conceal
his indifference under the pretext that his information is incredible.
Therefore, the law says he "shall permit the adulterer surprised in his house
to depart," because it wishes to punish the husband who caught her in such an
infamous act.
(1) When the law says that anyone who marries a woman who has been convicted of
adultery shall be legally liable, let us see whether this refers to
fornication? The better opinion is that it does, for if the woman was condemned
for any other reason under that law she could be married with impunity.
(2) He also is punished who accepts money on account of the fornication which
he detected, and it does not make any difference whether the husband himself or
someone else receives it, for he who accepts compensation for concealing his
knowledge of fornication should be punished. The law, however, does not apply
to him who keeps the secret gratuitously.
(3) Anyone who has pecuniarily profited by the adultery of his wife shall be
punished; for he who acts as his wife's pander does not commit a trivial
offence.
(4) A man who receives anything in consideration of the adultery of his wife is
held to have received it in order that she might commit adultery; and whether
he has obtained it frequently or only once, he ought not to be exempt from
punishment. He is correctly said to have profited by the adultery of his wife,
who accepts something in order that she may be permitted to be debauched, as
prostitutes are. Where, however, he permits his wife to commit the offence, not
on account
of gain, but through negligence, his own fault, or a certain degree of
indifference, or excessive credulity, he is considered to have been placed
outside the law.
(5) The division of the six months is made as follows: in the case of a married
woman, the time is computed from the day of the divorce; in the case of a
widow, from the day when the offence was committed. This seems to be indicated
by a rescript addressed to the Consuls Tertyllus and Maximus. Moreover, if
sixty days have elapsed since the divorce, and the term of five years has
passed since the day when the crime was perpetrated, it must be said that the
woman cannot be accused; so that when six available months are granted, this
should be understood to mean that the accusation, having been extinguished by
the uninterrupted period of five years, cannot be renewed.
(6) The legislator intended that this term of five years should be observed,
when either of the defendants was accused of fornication, adultery, or
pandering. Therefore what ought to be done if another crime derived from the
Julian Law should be pleaded as a defence, as in the case of those who lend
their houses for the purpose of fornication, and of others like them?
The better opinion is, that all of the offences included in the Julian Law are
prescribed after the lapse of five years.
(7) Moreover, the five years must be reckoned from the day when the crime was
committed to the one on which the party was prosecuted, and not to that on
which the judgment for adultery was carried into execution.
(8) It was also added in the Decree of the Senate that if several persons
should prosecute the same defendant, reference must be had to the date of the
information of the one who persevered in the prosecution; so that he who brings
the accusation may rely upon his own information, and not on those of the
others.
(9) There is no doubt that anyone who has committed fornication by means of
force employed against the man or woman in question can be prosecuted without
reference to the above-mentioned term of five years; for there is no doubt that
he has committed a criminal act of violence.
30. Paulus, On Adultery, Book I.
A father cannot prosecute, without exposing himself to the risk of a false
accusation.
(1) The sixty days are computed from the time of the divorce, and in the sixty
the sixtieth is itself included.
31. The Same, On Adultery, Book II.
The term of five years should be reckoned continuously, and not merely by
computing the available days. But what course must be pursued if the woman was
accused first, and, as the adulterer could not be prosecuted at the same time,
the case having been protracted for an extended period, the term of five years
should expire? What
if he who began the prosecution within five years did not carry it to a
conclusion, or was guilty of prevarication, and another should desire to
proceed after the five years have elapsed? It is just to deduct from the five
years the time which was consumed by the preceding prosecution.
32. Macer, On Public Prosecutions, Book I.
It makes no difference whether the father kills his daughter surprised in
adultery first, or not, provided he kills both guilty parties; for if he kills
only one of them, he will be liable under the Cornelian Law. If, however, one
of them should be killed, and the other wounded, he is not released under the
terms of the law; but the Divine Marcus and Commodus stated in a Rescript that
he ought to be granted impunity, for the reason that, although the adulterer
was killed, and the woman survived, after having received serious wounds
inflicted upon her by her father, she was saved rather by accident, than
intentionally; because the law requires the same indignation and the same
severity to be displayed toward all those who are taken in adultery.
(1) Where a husband has selected one of two culprits who have been guilty of
adultery, he cannot accuse the other before the first case is terminated;
because two persons cannot be accused by the same individual at the same time.
Still, the prosecutor, while proceeding against the adulterer or the
adulteress, is not prevented from also accusing anyone who lent his house for
the purpose, or advised that the charge be suppressed by the payment of money.
33. Marcianus, Public Prosecutions, Book I.
Where anyone alleges that adultery has been committed by his slave, with a
woman whom he had for his wife, the Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that he
must accuse the woman before subjecting his slave to torture to her prejudice.
(1) If anyone should not let an adulterer depart, but detains him, as, for
instance, his son, accused of adultery with his stepmother, or his freedman, or
slave accused with his wife, he is guilty, according to the spirit, but not
according to the letter of the law. The woman, however, who is detained, shall
be punished. If, however, having driven her away, he should bring her back, he
is not guilty according to strict construction of the law, but he must still be
considered liable in order to avoid the commission of fraud.
(2) If a woman receives the price of adultery committed by her husband, she
will be punishable as an adulteress under the Julian Law.
34. Modestinus, Rules, Book I.
He is guilty of fornication who keeps a free woman for the purpose of
cohabiting with her, but not with the intention of marrying her, excepting, of
course, a concubine.
(1) Adultery is committed with a married woman; fornication with a widow, a
virgin, or a boy.
35. The Same, Rules, Book Vill.
He who desires to bring an accusation of adultery, and makes a mistake in the
information, is not forbidden to correct it; provided that the time has not
passed by which the right to proceed is extinguished.
36. Papinianus, Questions, Book III.
When a minor is guilty of adultery, he will be liable under the Julian Law,
because a crime of this kind can be committed after puberty.
37. The Same, Questions, Book V.
It has been decided that a son under paternal control can, without the consent
of his father, accuse his wife of adultery in a public action, for he avenges
his own suffering.
38. The Same, Questions, Book XXXII.
If adultery is committed at the same time as incest, for instance, with a
stepdaughter, a daughter-in-law, or a stepmother, the woman shall also be
punished, for this will take place even where adultery was not committed.
(1) When fornication is committed with the daughter of a sister, should it not
be considered whether the penalty of adultery will be sufficient for the
husband ? It happens, in the present instance, that a double crime has been
perpetrated, because there is a great deal of difference where an unlawful
marriage is contracted by mistake, and where contempt of the law and insult to
blood are combined.
(2) Wherefore, the woman must undergo the same penalty as the man, when she has
committed incest prohibited by the Law of Nations; for if only the observation
of our law is involved, she will not be liable for the crime of incest.
(3) Sometimes, however, in the case of males, the crime of incest, although
more serious in its nature, is ordinarily treated less severely than that of
adultery; provided the incest has been committed through an illegal marriage.
(4) Finally, the Imperial Brothers released Claudia from responsibility for the
crime of incest, on account of her age, but they directed that the unlawful tie
should be severed; although, otherwise, the crime of adultery, when committed
after puberty, is not excusable on account of age. For it is stated above that
women who are mistaken with reference to the law are not liable for the crime
of incest; but when they commit adultery they can have no excuse.
(5) The same Emperors stated in a Rescript that after a divorce which a stepson
obtained in good faith from his stepmother, the accusation of incest should not
be admitted.
(6) They also stated in a Rescript to Pollio: "Incestuous marriages are not
usually confirmed, and therefore if a person withdraws from such a marriage, we
will remit the penalty of the past offence, if the guilty party has not yet
been prosecuted."
(7) Moreover, incest committed by means of an unlawful marriage is ordinarily
excused on account of sex or age, or even after separation, if it takes place
in good faith, and a mistake is alleged; and the more readily if no one appears
to prosecute.
(8) The Emperor Marcus Antoninus and his Son Commodus stated in a Rescript that
if a husband, impelled by the violence of his grief, kills his wife surprised
in adultery, he will not be liable to the penalty imposed on assassins by the
Cornelian Law; for the Divine Pius made the following statements in a Rescript
addressed to Ap-pollonius: "If anyone does not deny that he has killed his
wife, taken in adultery, he may be excused from suffering the extreme penalty,
as it is very difficult to restrain justifiable grief; but because he has done
more than he should to revenge himself, he must be punished. Therefore, if he
is of inferior rank, it will be sufficient for him to be sentenced to hard
labor for life; and if he is of superior station, he shall be relegated to an
island."
(9) A freedman is not readily permitted to attack the reputation of his patron,
but he should be permitted to do so if he desires to accuse him of adultery by
the right of a husband, just as if he had suffered some other atrocious injury.
Where, however, the patron is of the number of those who, if surprised in the
commission of this crime, can be killed by another, and if he is caught
committing adultery with his wife, it should be considered whether the freedman
can kill him with impunity. This seems to us to be rather hard, for reputation,
much more than life, should be respected.
(10) Anyone who occupies a position of honor, or an office in the public
service, can be prosecuted, but the accusation will be postponed ; and if he
furnishes a surety to appear, the case will be deferred until the expiration of
his term of office. This was stated by Tiberius Caesar in a Rescript.
39. The Same, Opinions, Book XV.
The decision of the Governor of a province was that a certain woman had been
violated. I held that she was not liable under the Julian Law relating to
Adultery; although, for the purpose of protecting her modesty, she was
prevented from immediately informing her husband of the injury which she had
sustained.
(1) Even after the woman has married a second time, although her first husband
may not have been prosecuted as her pander, the charge of adultery can be
brought against the adulterer by a stranger.
(2) Even if the woman should die during marriage, her husband has a right to
prosecute the adulterer.
(3) A woman who was married before the person who committed adultery with her
has been convicted cannot be prosecuted for this offence, if notice was not
served upon her at the wedding, or at her residence.
(4) I gave it as my opinion that a woman who has been exiled on account of her
association with robbers could be retained in mar-
riage without the fear of incurring a penalty, because she was not convicted of
adultery.
(5) The crime of incest, joined with adultery, is not prescribed after the
lapse of five years.
(6) It is settled that two persons, the man and the woman, cannot lawfully be
prosecuted for adultery at the same time, even by the husband; but when both of
them have been accused at once by someone who subsequently wished to desist, I
hold that an acquittal will be necessary in the case of both parties.
(7) A common accusation for incest can be brought against two persons at the
same time.
(8) I gave it as my opinion that where two masters were accused of incest,
their slaves could only be put to the torture where the incest was alleged to
have been committed by adultery.
40. Paulus, Opinions, Book XIX.
The question was asked whether a woman, whose husband had threatened to accuse
her of the crime of adultery, but had not done so either in the capacity of
husband or under the common law, could marry the man whom he had indicated as
being guilty of adultery? Paulus answered that in the case in question there
was nothing to prevent her from marrying the man whom her husband had
suspected.
(1) It was likewise asked whether the same husband should be considered to have
desisted, or to have acted as a pander, if he afterwards took back the same
wife? Paulus answered that he who took back the same wife, after having brought
an accusation of adultery against her, was considered to have desisted; and
hence, under the same law, he had no longer the right to accuse her.
41. The Same, Sentences, Book I.
No delay should be granted in an accusation of adultery, unless to compel the
appearance of the persons in court; or where the judge, induced by the
circumstances of the case, permits it, after proper cause has been shown.
42. Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book II.
If he who has obtained the right to wear a gold ring should commit adultery
with the wife of his patron; or with his patroness; or with the wife of him, or
of the father of him from whom he obtained his freedom; or with the mother, or
the son's wife; or with the daughter of any of these persons, shall he be
punished as a freedman? And if he is surprised in adultery, can he be killed
with impunity? I am inclined to think that he should be subjected to the
penalty imposed upon freedmen; because, by the Julian Law for the suppression
of Adultery, and with a view to the protection of marriage, it is settled that
they should be considered as freedmen; and, as the result of this advantage,
the case of patrons should not be rendered any worse.
43. Gaius, On the Law of the Twelve Tables, Book III.If the notice of
repudiation was not served in accordance with law, and therefore the woman is
still considered to be married; yet, if any-
one takes her as his wife, he will not be an adulterer. Salvius Julianus was
the author of this opinion; because, as he says, adultery cannot be committed
without malicious contrivance. It should, however, be held that he is guilty of
malicious contrivance who knew that she had not been legally repudiated.
44. Papinianus, Opinions, Book IV.
If his mother-in-law is dead, a son-in-law can be prosecuted for incest with
her, just as an adulterer can be prosecuted after the death of the woman.

* 48.VI. CONCERNING THE JULIAN LAW ON PUBLIC VIOLENCE.

1. Marcianus-, Institutes, Book XIV.
He is liable under the Julian Law relating to Public Violence who collects arms
or darts in his house, or on his land, or in a farm house, in larger quantities
than is customary for the purpose of hunting, or travel by land or water.
2. Scsevola, Rules, Book IV.
Arms which anyone has for the purpose of trade, or which have descended to him
by inheritance, are excepted.
3. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIV.
Those, also, are in the same position who form the design of exciting a tumult,
or sedition, and have slaves or freemen under arms.
(1) He is liable under the same law who, having arrived at puberty, appears
armed in public.
(2) Those are in the same position who, offering an extremely bad example by
having assembled in numbers and excited sedition, plunder country-houses, and
with darts or arms commit robbery.
(3) He also is liable who, in case of fire, removes by violence anything except
the materials of the building.
(4) Moreover, he who pollutes by force a boy or a woman, or anyone whomsoever,
is also liable to punishment under this law.
(5) He also who goes to a fire armed with a sword or other weapon for the
purpose of robbery, or to prevent the owner from saving his property, is liable
to the same penalty.
(6) He is liable under the same law who, with armed men assembled in a body
with a display of force, expels a possessor from his house, his land, or his
ship:
4. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LIX.Or has provided men for this purpose.
5. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIV.
Anyone who, by means of an assembly, a crowd, a tumult, or a sedition, causes a
conflagration; or who maltreats a man whom he has
wrongfully confined; or who prevents a body from being buried, to better enable
him to disperse and plunder a funeral procession; or forcibly compels someone
to become obligated to him, for the law rescinds an obligation of this kind, is
liable.
(1) When a question of violence and possession, or ownership is involved, the
Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that the violence should be investigated
before the right of ownership, which Rescript, written in Greek, was addressed
to the community of the Thessalians.
He also decreed that the question of violence should be examined before that of
ownership or possession was decided.
(2) Anyone who has ravished a free woman, or one who is married, shall be
punished with death. If her father, moved by prayers, pardons his injury, a
stranger can prosecute without being barred by the prescription of five years,
because the crime of rape exceeds in scope the Julian Law relating to
Adultery.1
1Adultery was regarded by the ancients as a much more serious offence than has
usually been the case in recent times. Before the reign of Augustus, it was
considered a private wrong, but after the Lex Julia de Adulteriiswas enacted,
those who were charged with it were placed in the category of public criminals,
and were, under certain circumstances, liable to prosecution by anyone who
might desire to undertake it. The dissolution of the marriage was an
indispensable prerequisite, and no proceedings could be taken with a view to
the punishment of either of the parties as long as this relation existed. The
husband, or the father of the woman could, within sixty days from the date of
the divorce, file the accusation, which originally was barred after the
expiration of six months. The time was afterwards extended to five years. (Code
IX, IX, 28.)
Constantine was the first Roman legislator who decreed that adultery should be
punished with death.
For fear that an important source of evidence might be destroyed, a woman was
prohibited by law from liberating, selling, or otherwise disposing of any
slaves belonging to her, before the expiration of sixty days after her divorce.
The freedom of a slave emancipated prior to that date was legally held to be
conditional, and entirely dependent upon whether he would, in the meantime, be
put to torture to convict his mistress.
The Babylonians exacted the extreme penalty in cases of adultery: "If the wife
of a man be taken in lying with another man, they shall bind them and throw
them into the water." The husband, however, was authorized to condone the wrong
when he wished to do so. (The Code of Hammurabi, 129.)
Adultery was, nevertheless, deemed justifiable in order to avoid starvation.
"If a man be captured and there be no maintenance in his house, and his wife
openly enter into another house and bear children; if later her husband return
and arrive in his city, that woman shall return to her husband and the children
shall go to their father." (Ibid.,135.)
The Egyptians deprived an adulteress of her nose and ears. (Ezekiel XXIII, 25.)
The Mosaic Law originally prescribed that persons guilty of adultery should
perish by fire. (Genesis XXXVIII, 4.) They were afterwards stoned to death.
"And the man that committeth adultery with another man's wife, even he that
committed adultery with his neighbor's wife, the adulterer and the adulteress
shall surely be put to death." (Leviticus XX, 10. Deuteronomy XXII, 21, 22.)
Ancient Hindu legislators recognized several degrees of this offence, including
the various attempts and advances of seduction, the bestowal of gifts, the
practice of unlawful familiarities or deception, and forcible violation,
designated by mediaeval jurisprudence as "adultery with violence," and known to
us as rape. The first three of these were punished by fines; the others
entailed penalties of
6. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book VII.
The Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that whoever ravishes a freeborn boy
should be punished, as follows: "I have ordered the submission to me of a
petition presented by Domitius Silvanus, in the name of Domitius Silvanus, his
paternal uncle, who, having been influenced by his complaint, in which it is
stated that his son who was freeborn, and still very young, was carried away by
force, shut up, and after-
almost incredible barbarity. "If a Man, by Force, commits Adultery with a Woman
of an equal or inferior Cast, against her Consent, the Magistrate shall
confiscate all his possessions, cut off his Penis, and castrate him, and cause
him to be led round the City, mounted upon an Ass."
"If a Man, by Cunning and Deceit, commits Adultery with a Woman of an equal or
inferior Cast, against her Consent, the Magistrate shall take all his
Possessions, brand him in the Forehead with the Mark of the Pudendum
Muliebre,and banish him from the Kingdom."
"If a Man, by Violence, or by Cunning, or Deceit, or against the Woman's
Consent, commits Adultery with a Woman of a superior Cast, the Magistrate shall
deprive him of life." (Gentoo Code XIX, I, II, III.)
"Should a wife, proud of her family and the great qualities of her kinsmen,
actually violate the duty which she owes to her lord, let the king condemn her
to be devoured by dogs in a place much frequented; and let him place the
adulterer on an iron bed well heated, under which the executioners shall throw
logs continually, till the sinful wretch be there burned to death." (Sir Wm.
Jones, The Laws of Menu, Page 327.)
The Romans borrowed their right to avenge adultery as a private injury from the
Greeks, who enjoyed much greater latitude in this respect. The latter included
seduction and rape under this designation. Greek husbands, unlike the Roman,
were not obliged to repudiate the wives before their conviction, but if they
did not do so afterwards, they were considered disgraced. The guilty woman was
forbidden to enter a public temple, and was subjected to many indignities. "No
adulteress shall be permitted to adorn herself; she that doth, shall have her
garments cut or torn off her back by any that meets her, and likewise be
beaten, though not so as to be killed or disabled." (Potter, Antiquities of
Greece I, Page 203.) The penalty was a fine of from a hundred to a thousand
drachmas;that is from $2(J to $200.
Under Visigothic law, a man who committed "adultery with violence" upon a
married woman, was, with all his possessions, delivered up to the tender
mercies of the husband, provided that he had no legitimate children. If he had
any, his property was reserved for their benefit, and he personally expiated
his crime in the hands of the man whom he had wronged.
No limit to marital vengeance was imposed when the woman was a voluntary
participant in the act. "Quod si mulieris fuerit fortasse consensus, marito
similis sit potestas de his faciendi quod ei placet." (Forum Judicum,III, IV,
I.)
The early Castilian jurists, in dealing with adultery, adopted, almost
verbatim,the rules laid down by the Civil Law. The knowledge and intention of
the parties accused were necessary to entail criminal responsibility, so far as
either he or she was concerned. A husband was at liberty to slay a man of
inferior rank, if caught flagrante delicto,no matter where, with his wife; but
he was not allowed to kill her under any circumstances, or her companion in
case the latter was his lord, his patron, or someone of exalted dignity to whom
he owed either protection or respect. A father could kill his daughter along
with her paramour, if he surprised them in his own house, or in that of his
son-in-law, but it was obligatory upon him to put both of them to death at
once.
The penalty incurred by the adulterer was capital; the woman was publicly
scourged, her dowry was forfeited, and she was confined in a nunnery for two
years. At the end of that time her husband could pardon her and take her back
wards subjected to blows and tortures, with great danger to his life. My dear
brother, I request you to hear him, and, if you ascertain that these offences
have been committed, punish them severely."
7. The Same, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book Vill.Anyone who is invested with
authority or power, and subjects a Roman citizen to death or scourging, or
orders this to be done, or at-
to his house, if he chose to do so; if not, she was compelled to assume the
religious habit, and remain immured in the monastery for the rest of her life.
"y4.CMsado seyendo algun ome, que ouiesse fecho adulterio, si le fuesse prouado
que lo fizo, deue morir porende; mas la muger que fixiesse el adulterio, maguer
le fuesse prouado en juyzio, deue ser castigada, e ferida publicamente con
azotes, e puesta, e encerrada en algun Monasterio de duenas; e demas desto,
deue perder la dote, e las arras que le fueron dadas par razon del casamiento,
e deuen ser del marido. Pero si el marido la quisiere perdonar despues desto,
puedelo fazer fasta dos anos. E si le perdonare el yerro, puedela sacar del
Monasterio, e tornarla a su casa." (Las Siete PartidasVII, XVII, III, XIII,
XIV, XV.)
A singular remedy for adultery was prescribed by Anglo-Saxon jurisprudence. "If
a freeman lie with a freeman's wife let him pay for it with his wer-geld,and
provide another wife with his own money, and bring her to the other." The
adulteress was afterwards put to death, and the adulterer fined. (Ancient Laws
and Institutes of England; The Laws of King ^thelbirht, 31. The Laws of King
Cnut, 4, 51.)
In Wales, the accused persons could clear themselves by the adulterer calling
fifty men, and the adulteress the same number of women to swear to their
innocence; which would seem to have been a rather difficult matter to
accomplish without the commission of perjury. No special favor was conceded to
members of the male sex, as was the case in many other countries. "If a married
woman should be guilty of any shameful crime, such as giving a kiss to a man,
allowing him to take improper liberties with her, or committing adultery with
him, her husband shall receive a fine for the insult. If she be convicted of
adultery, the fine for the insult shall be increased upwards of one half, for
this is productive of enmity from the family."
"Her satisfaction for injury is as follows: if she detect her husband with
another woman, let him pay her one hundred and twenty pence for the first
offence; for the second, one pound; and if she detect him a third time, she can
separate from him without loss of property; and the property which she obtains
for these three things shall be hers apart from her husband." (The Ancient Laws
of Cambria, Laws of Howel the Good, Pages 131, 136.)
Adultery, under the Canon Law, was understood to embrace all unlawful carnal
intercourse of every description whatsoever. "Omnis illicitus coitus defini-tur
adulterium esse." (Corpus Juris Canonici, Decret,II, IX, IV.) It was considered
by the Church as a sin inferior in gravity only to apostasy. "Quid in omnibus
peccatis adulterio gravius? Secundum namque in paenis obtinet locum; quoniam
quidem primum illi habent qui aberrant a Deo." (Ibid.,Decret, II, VII, XVI.)
Divorce did not sever the marriage tie ("manet vinculum"),and while the parties
might subsequently become reconciled, neither could marry during the lifetime
of the other; a rule which has been adopted by the secular legislative bodies
of many nations.
According to Moslem Law, four male witnesses, or three men and two women, must
appear to establish the commission of adultery, and they must have seen the
very act of copulation performed in order to render the evidence conclusive.
For this punishment to be valid it was essential that both parties should be of
the Mussulman faith, free, married, of sound mind and mature age. In the first
century of Islam, the woman was immured until she died; afterwards, both
culprits were subjected to lapidation, as under the Jewish system. "Against
those of your
taches anything to his neck for the purpose of torturing him, without
permitting him to appeal, is liable under the Julian Law relating to Public
Violence. This also applies to deputies and orators, and their attendants,
where anyone is proved to have beaten them, or caused them any injury.
8. Marcianus, Public Prosecutions, Book V.
By the Julian Law relating to Public Violence, it is provided that no one can
bind an accused person, or prevent him from appearing at Rome within a certain
time.
women who commit adultery, call witnesses four in number from among yourselves;
and if these bear witness, then keep the women in houses until death release
them, or God shall make for them a way." (The Koran, Sura, IV, 19.)
"A married person convicted of whoredom is to be stoned." "It is unlawful to
spill the blood of a Mussulman excepting only for three causes, namely,
apostasy, whoredom after marriage, and murder." (The Hedaya II, VII, 1.) To
insure the credibility of the witnesses, they are obliged, at the execution, to
cast the first stones; it being understood that if, having testified falsely,
they should experience remorse for having perjured themselves, they can retract
their testimony, and thereby release the alleged adulterer, who, in the
meantime, has suffered no physical injury. Express recantation is not
necessary; mere hesitancy on their part is sufficient to arrest the proceeding
and discharge the accused. The same result is accomplished in case the
witnesses should die, or abscond; for as the execution of the sentence cannot
legally begin, of course it becomes impossible to carry it out. When confession
of the offence is formally made before the magistrate it must be repeated four
times on as many different occasions, to merit judicial notice: "the Kazee
declining to receive the confession, and sending the person away the first,
second, and third time." The reason for this is: "As in evidence to whoredom
four witnesses are requisite, so also in the confession thereof four
repetitions are requisite." (The Hedaya II, VII, 1.)
The husband is authorized by law to kill both his wife and her lover, if
surprised flagrante delicto.
The criminal law of Sweden recognizes no distinction between -the culpability
of persons of different sexes, and hence does not treat the offence of the
husband with more leniency, as is the case in some other European countries.
Where both parties are married, the penalty imposed is much greater than where
one of them is single. In the latter instance, it varies from a fine to six
months imprisonment; in the former both may be imprisoned for from six months
to two years. "Gor gift man hor med ogift kvinna, eller gift kvinna med ogift
man; straffes den, som gift dr, med fangelse i hogst sex manader eller boter,
och den ogifte med boter."
"Forova man och kvinna, som bdda gifta dro, hor med varannan; vare straf-fet
fangelse frdn och med sex manader till och med tva dr." (Sveriges Rikes Lag,17
Kap.1, 2.)
Denmark, which also makes a distinction in double adultery, prescribes the
penalty of imprisonment at hard labor for from two to six years, where both
persons are married; where only one is married, the term is two years.
(Almindelig borgerlig Straffelov,Sec. 160.)
The German Criminal Code does not consider adultery deserving of punishment,
unless, in consequence of it, dissolution of marriage takes place. The penalty,
under such circumstances, is a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months.
"Der Ehebruch wird, wenn wegen desselben die Ehe geschieden ist, an dem
schuldigen Ehegatten, sovie dessen Mitschuldigen mit Gefdngnis bis zu sechs
Monaten bestraft." (Strafgetzbuch fiir das Deutsche Reich,Sec. 172.)
The Austrian law is similar to that of Germany, excepting that the woman is
punished more severely whenever any doubt as to the paternity of a child may
9. Paulus, On the Edict, Book VII.
By "armed persons" we should understand not merely those who have darts, but
also anything else with which they can cause injury.
10. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXVIII.
He who fraudulently prevents the free administration of justice, or prevents
the judges from deciding as they should do; or he who, being invested with
power or authority, acts in any other way than the law decrees and requires
that he should; and anyone who unjustly compels a person to promise, either
publicly or privately, to furnish slaves, or pay money; and also anyone who,
with malicious intent, appears armed in an assembly, or in a place where
justice is publicly administered, with the exception of him who collects men in
order to hunt wild beasts, and who is permitted to keep people for this
purpose, will be liable under this law.
(1) He, also, is liable under this law, who, where men have been assembled,
uses force for the purpose of striking or beating someone, even though he may
not be killed.
(2) He who is convicted of having employed public violence is interdicted the
use of water and fire.
arise after the commission of the unlawful act. (Allgemeines Strafgesetz,Art.
502.)
In France, the guilty woman, and her companion, are each subject to
imprisonment for from three months to two years; but the latter is also fined
from one hundred to two thousand francs. "Le complice de la femme adultere sera
puni de I'emprisonnement pendant le meme espace de temps, et, en outre, d'une
amende de100 francs a2000 francs." (Code Penal de France,Art. 338.)
The Spanish Code fixes the punishment of adultery at imprisonment from one
year, eight months and twenty-one days, to four years and two months. The woman
alone need be married, and the man aware of this fact. It makes no difference,
even if the majriage was void ab initio,provided the adulterer knew that it
existed. "Cometen adulterio la mujer casada que yace con varon que no sea su
mar-ido, y el que yace con ella sabiendo que es casada, aunque despues se
declare nulo el matrimonio." (Codigo Penal de Espana,Art. 448.)
Italian law sentences each participant to prison for from three to thirty
months. (Codice Penale del Regna d'ltalia,Art. 353.)
In the examples above cited, the old Roman doctrine that the husband has the
prior right to prosecute has been adopted; but the modern laws go farther, and
concede this privilege to him alone.
Adultery is not now, and never has been classed as a penal offence under the
secular jurisprudence of England. Until the passage by Parliament of the
Divorce Act, 20 & 21 Vie., c. 85, it was subject only to ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, to be atoned for by public reprimand and penance.
In the United States, the definition of adultery varies according to the
statutory provisions of the different Commonwealths, but the one most generally
accepted is the following: "Sexual connection by a man and a woman, one of whom
is lawfully married to a third person." (Wharton, A Treatise on Criminal Law,
Sec. 2066.)
Under the United States laws, when the act is committed between a man who is
married, and a woman who is not, the man alone is considered guilty. (Barnes'
Federal Code, Sec. 10018.) Where it exists on the Statute Books as a crime, it
is very rarely prosecuted; recourse usually being had to a civil suit for
damages.
In Connecticut, in the seventeenth century, the Mosaic penalty of death was
inflicted to the letter. (The Code of 1650, Capitale Lawes, Sec. 8.)---ED.
11. Paulus, Sentences, Book V.
Those who have plundered the houses of others in the city or in the country, or
have broken into them, or seized them, and have done so by means of a mob and
with a display of armed force, shall be punished capitally.
(1) By the term "arms," is understood everything a man can make use of to cause
injury.
(2) Those who carry arms in order to protect themselves are not considered to
carry them for the purpose of killing anyone.
12. The Same, On the Turpillian Decree of the Senate.
Those who impose new taxes arbitrarily are liable under the Julian Law relating
to Public Violence.

* 48.VII. CONCERNING THE JULIAN LAW RELATING TO PRIVATE VIOLENCE.

1. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIV.
Anyone who is convicted of private violence is punished under the Julian Law by
the confiscation of the third part of his property; and it is provided that he
shall not be a senator or a decurion; or obtain any mark of distinction, or be
permitted to sit with any of the above-named officials; or be a judge; and,
according to the Decree of the Senate, he shall be stripped of all his honors
as a person who is infamous.
(1) Those who are liable to the penalty of the Julian Law relating to Private
Violence are subjected to the same punishment if they have been guilty of
fraudulently and forcibly appropriating any goods in a shipwreck.
(2) Anyone who plunders property which has been shipwrecked is punished
arbitrarily under the Imperial Constitutions; for the Divine Pius stated in a
Rescript that no force should be employed against sailors, and if anyone did so
that he should be severely punished.

2. Scsevola, Rules, Book IV.
He is liable under this law who, by means of a crowd of men, employs force, in
consequence of which some person is beaten or struck, even if no one is killed.

3. Macer, Public Prosecutions, Book I.
It makes no difference whether the crowd was convoked for the purpose of
employing violence against freemen, or one's own slaves, or slaves belonging to
another.
(1) Those who have been assembled are none the less liable under the same law.
(2) If, however, no persons have been assembled, and none has been beaten, but
something has been unjustly taken from property belonging to others, he who did
so will be liable under this law.

4. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LV.
The crime punished by the Julian Law is committed where someone is said to have
assembled a crowd or a mob, to prevent a person from being produced in court.
(1) If anyone should put the slave of another to torture, Labeo says that the
Edict of the Praetor relating to injuries can be resorted to, and thus greater
moderation be displayed.

5. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXIX.
If anyone should expel a person from his land by means of a crowd of men who
are unarmed, he can be prosecuted for private violence.

6. Modestinus, Rules, Book Vill.
Under the Volusian Decree of the Senate, those who improperly assemble
in order to manifest opposition to a lawsuit of others, and agree that
anything obtained from the parties by condemnation shall be divided
among them, are liable under the Julian Law relating to Private
Violence.

7. Callistratus, On Judicial Inquiries, Book V.
Creditors, who proceed against their debtors, should demand a second time,
through the judge, what they think to be due to them. Otherwise, if they enter
upon the property of the debtor without permission having been given them to do
so, the Divine Marcus decreed that they had no longer any right to their
claims. The following are the terms of the Decree: "It is very proper, where
you think that you have claims, that you should attempt to collect them by
means of actions. In the meantime, the other party should remain in possession,
for you are merely the plaintiff." And when Marcianus said that no force had
been employed, the Emperor replied: "You think that force is only employed when
men are wounded. Force is employed when anyone thinks that he can take what is
due to him without demanding it a second time through the judge. I do not think
that it is consistent either with your character for reserve or your dignity,
to commit an act which is unauthorized by law. Therefore, whenever it is proved
to me that any property of the debtor was not delivered by him to his creditor,
but that the latter boldly took possession of it without being authorized by a
court, and he has declared that he was entitled to the property, he will
forfeit his right to the claim."

8. Modestinus, On Punishments, Book II.
Where a creditor, without judicial authority, seizes the property of his
debtor, he is liable under this law, will be fined a third part of his
property, and will become infamous.

* 48.VIII. CONCERNING THE CORNELIAN LAW RELATING TO ASSASSINS AND POISONERS.

1. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIV.
Under the Cornelian Law relating to Assassins and Poisoners, anyone who kills a
man; or through whose malice a fire has originated; or who has gone about armed
for the purpose of killing someone or committing theft; or who, being a
magistrate, or presiding in a criminal case, enables false testimony to be
given by which an innocent person may be prosecuted, or convicted, is liable.
(1) He also is liable who prepares poison, and administers it for the purpose
of killing a man; or who, with malicious intent gives false testimony, by means
of which anyone may be sentenced to death in a criminal prosecution; or any
magistrate or judge who accepts money in consideration of causing someone to be
accused of a crime.
(2) Anyone who has committed homicide is punished without taking into account
the legal condition of the person who was killed.
(3) The Divine Hadrian stated in a Rescript that anyone who killed a man,
without the intention of doing so, could be acquitted; and that anyone who did
not kill a man, but wounded him for the purpose of killing him, should be
convicted of homicide; and that the decision should be rendered according to
the circumstances of the case, for if the aggressor drew a sword and struck him
with it, there is no doubt of his having done this with the intention of
killing him. Where, however, during a quarrel, he struck him with a spike, or a
brass vessel used in a bath, although the article employed was of metal, still
the attack was not made with the intention of killing him; and the penalty
imposed upon one who in a quarrel committed homicide rather accidentally than
intentionally, should be mitigated.
(4) The Divine Hadrian also stated in a Rescript that he who killed anyone who
was forcibly attempting to commit an act of debauchery with himself, or with
those belonging to him, should be discharged.
(5) But with regard to a husband who kills his wife surprised in the act of
adultery, the Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that a lighter penalty should be
inflicted upon him; and he ordered that anyone of inferior rank should be sent
into perpetual exile, and that a person of distinguished position should be
relegated for a certain time.
2. Ulpianus, On Adultery, Book I.
A father cannot kill his son without his having been heard; but he should
accuse him before the Prefect or the Governor of the province.
3. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIV.
Anyone who has prepared poison, or sells it, or keeps it for the purpose of
killing human beings, is punished by the Fifth Section of the same Cornelian
Law relating to Assassins and Poisoners.
(1) The penalty of this law is imposed upon any one who publicly sells
injurious poisons or keeps them for the purpose of homicide.
(2) The expression "injurious poisons" shows that there are certain poisons
which are not injurious. Therefore the term is an ambiguous one, and includes
what can be used for curing disease as well as for causing death. There also
are preparations called love philtres. These, however, are only forbidden by
this law where they are designed to kill people. A woman was ordered by a
decree of the Senate to be banished, who, not with malicious intent, but
offering a bad example, administered for the purpose of producing conception a
drug which, having been taken, caused death.
It is provided by another Decree of the Senate that dealers in ointments who
rashly sell hemlock, salamander, aconite, pine-cones, bu-prestis, mandragora,
and give cantharides as a purgative, are liable to the penalty of this law.
(4) Likewise, he whose slaves, with his knowledge, have taken up arms for the
purpose of obtaining or recovering the possession of property; or one who is
the promoter of sedition; or who has appropriated shipwrecked merchandise; or
who has represented matters which are false to be true, that an innocent person
might be deceived; or who has caused this to be done; or who has castrated a
man on account of debauchery, or in order to sell him, is, under the Decree of
the Senate, subjected to the penalty of the Cornelian Law.
(5) The penalty of the Cornelian Law relating to Assassins and Poisoners is
deportation to an island and the confiscation of all property. It is, however,
at present customary to inflict capital punishment, unless the parties in
question occupy such a high position that they are not amenable to the law. It
is customary for persons of inferior rank to be thrown to wild beasts, and for
those higher in the social scale to be deported to an island.
(6) It is permitted to kill deserters, just as if they were enemies, wherever
they may be found.
4. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book VII.
He is liable under the Cornelian Law relating to Assassins who, while occupying
the position of magistrate, commits some act involving the life of a man which
is not authorized by law.
(1) When a man, through mere wantonness, causes the death of another, the
decision of Ignatius Taurinus, Proconsul of Bsetica, who relegated the guilty
party for a term of five years, was confirmed by the Divine Hadrian.
(2) The Divine Hadrian also stated the following in a Rescript: "It is
forbidden by the Imperial Constitutions that eunuchs should be made, and they
provide that persons who are convicted of this crime are liable to the penalty
of the Cornelian Law, and that their property shall with good reason be
confiscated by the Treasury.
"But with reference to slaves who have made eunuchs, they should be punished
capitally, and those who are liable to this public crime and do not appear,
shall, even when absent, be sentenced under
the Cornelian Law. It is clear that if persons who have suffered this injury
demand justice, the Governor of the province should hear those who have lost
their virility; for no one has a right to castrate a freeman or a slave, either
against his consent or with it, and no one can voluntarily offer himself to be
castrated. If anyone should violate my Edict, the physician who performed the
operation shall be punished with death, as well as anyone who willingly offered
himself for emasculation."
5. Paulus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book II.
Those also who render persons impotent are, by a Constitution of the Divine
Hadrian addressed to Ninius Hasta, placed in the same class with those who
perform castration.
6. Venuleius Saturninus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book I.
He who delivers a slave to be castrated shall be punished by a fine of half his
property, under a decree of the Senate enacted during the Consulate of Neratius
Priscus and Annius Verus.
7. Paulus, On Public Prosecutions.
Under the Cornelian Law, the degree of fraud depends upon the act, but by this
law gross negligence is not considered fraud. Wherefore, if anyone precipitates
himself from a height and falls upon another and kills him, or if a man
trimming trees throwns down a branch and does not give warning, but kills a
passer-by, he will not be liable to punishment under this law.
8. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIII.
If it should be proved that a woman has employed force upon her abdomen for the
purpose of producing abortion, the Governor of the province shall send her into
exile.
9. The Same, On the Edict, Book XVIII.
If anyone kills a thief at night, he can only do so with impunity, when he
could not have spared him without placing himself in jeopardy.
10. The Same, On the Edict, Book XVIII.
If anyone should maliciously burn my house, he shall suffer capital punishment
as an incendiary.
11. Modestinus, Rules, Book VI.
By a Rescript of the Divine Pius, Jews are permitted to circumcise only their
own children, and anyone who performs this operation upon persons of a
different religion will incur the penalty for castration.
(1) If a slave, without having been sentenced, is thrown to wild beasts, not
only he who sold him, but also he who purchased him will be liable to
punishment.
(2) Since the passage of the Petronian Law and the Decrees of the Senate having
reference to it, masters are deprived of the power of
giving up their slaves, whenever they please, for the purpose of fighting wild
beasts. A master, however, can produce his slave in court, and if his complaint
is well founded, the slave can be subjected to the penalty,
12. The Same, Rules, Book Vill.
When an infant or an insane person commits homicide, he is not liable under the
Cornelian Law; for absence of intention protects the one, and his unhappy fate
excuses the other.
13. The Same, Pandects, Book XII.
By a decree of the Senate it is ordered that anyone who offers sacrifices for
the purpose of causing misfortune shall be subjected to the penalty of this
law.1
1 The invocation of evil spirits, and the practice of divination and magic by
others than those legally authorized under the religious system of the State to
perform sacred rites, and through their instrumentality anathematize the
living, and receive alleged communications from the dead, has always been
regarded by this important and privileged class as an unwarranted and dangerous
encroachment upon their exclusive prerogatives. Belief in the efficacy of these
superstitious observances, probably coincident with the origin of humanity, is
today far from extinct, as the existence and popularity of the numerous
charlatans who infest all great cities conclusively demonstrate.
The Laws of the Twelve Tables imposed the death penalty upon anyone who, by
means of incantations or diabolical arts, annoyed another, rendered him ill, or
destroyed his crops. (LegesXII, Tabularwm,VII, XIV.) Astrologers, commonly
styled "mathematicians," unlawful consulters of haruspices,and interpreters of
dreams were included in this category of infamy. "Geometriam, gnomonicam,
musicam eeterasque item disciplinas altiores/wt^^ctTa veteres Grieci
appellabant; vulgus autem, quos gentilicio vocabulo 'Chaldssos' dicere oportet,
'mathematicos' dicit."(Aulus Gellius, Noetic- AtticieI, IX.) The public
exercise of Pagan ceremonies, although condemned by the Church, was,
nevertheless, tolerated under many Christian emperors until the reign of
Justinian, who finally suppressed it.
The members of the Jewish hierarchy especially resented the practice of any
unorthodox rites which had a tendency to even indirectly interfere with their
authority, or curtail the privileges of their sacred order. The Pentateuch
abounds in denunciations of diviners, soothsayers, and magicians.
"A man also or woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall
surely be put to death; they shall stone them with stones; their blood shall be
upon them."
"There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son or his daughter
to pass through the fire, or that useth divination, or an observer of times, or
an enchanter, or a witch."
"Or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a
necromancer." (Leviticus XX, 27. Deuteronomy XVIII, 10, 11.) No leniency was
shown to the practitioner of sorcery of either sex. "Thou shall not suffer a
witch to live." (Exodus XXII, 18.)
Upon these Biblical precepts was based a large proportion of that atrocious
system of persecution which for ages stifled scientific thought; placed a
premium upon ignorance; swept from the face of the earth the noblest and most
intelligent of mankind; cast a blight upon the energies and progress of great
and powerful nations; and by the omnipresent menace of the scaffold and the
stake, spread terror through every assembly and every household.
English law disposed of persons accused of witchcraft and enchantment by means
of the writ "De hseretico comburendo";it being generally conceded that a wizard
or a witch must necessarily be a heretic. Devotion to literary pursuits and
14. Callistratus, On Judicial Inquiries, Book VI.
The Divine Hadrian stated the following in a Rescript: "In the perpetration of
crime, the intention, and npt the event, is considered."
15. Ulpianus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book Vill.
It makes no difference whether one actually kills another, or is merely the
cause of his death.
(1) He who orders another to be killed is considered a homicide.
16. Modestinus, On Punishments, Book III.
Those who voluntarily or maliciously commit murder are usually deported, if
they are of high rank; but if they are of inferior station they are punished
with death. This, however, is more excusable in
a marked desire for intellectual improvement, manifested by anyone not in
religious orders, at once aroused suspicion of an inclination to heretical
doctrines, or the study of magic; and this was confirmed when the subject under
investigation proved to be of a religious character. "The orthodox clergy, of
course, maintained that the most suspicious form of study which lay people
could undertake was that of divinity."
"It was easy, too, to foster a belief that no one could know, or even wish to
know, more than his neighbors, except through the influence of the Devil."
(Pike, History of Crime in England I, V, Page 352.)
Even the high dignitaries of the Church were not free from these abominations.
No less than six popes, Sylvester II, Alexander VI, John XIX, John XX, Benedict
IX, and Gregory II, were notoriously given to occult studies and the practice
of diabolical arts. Pope Sylvester II, whose scientific attainments excited the
wonder and clerical disapproval of his time, and eventually led to his
destruction, had the reputation of being a necromancer: "Negromante e di
dottrina ec-celente,"a questionable distinction also enjoyed by Gerald,
Archbishop of York, in the early part of the twelfth century, who, having been
found dead with a work on astrology under his pillow was, in consequence,
refused burial in consecrated ground.
The Canon Law did not punish sorcery unless clearly connected with heresy, but
the offender was turned over to the temporal authorities, who invariably
disposed of him in a manner eminently satisfactory to the clergy. "Sciendum
est, hiereticee pestis inquisitores de diuinationibus, & sortilegiis, nisi
hteresim saperent manifeste, sese intromittere non debere, nee talia exercentes
posse punire, sed eos suis debere iudicibus puniendos relinquere." (Corpus
Juris Canonici,Inst. IV, V.)
Forty days of penance were imposed upon anyone who practiced divination, or
attempted to predict the future by the consultation of books, or in any other
way. "In tabulis vel codicibus, aut aliis forte futuro, non sunt requirenda,
nee diuinationes aliquas in aliquibus rebus, quis obseruare prxsumat. Qui autem
contra fecerit, quadraginta dies pceniteat." (Corpus Juris Canonici,
Decret,Greg. V, XXI, 1.)
Priests were forbidden the use of the astrolabe, which being employed by Moors
and Jews for astronomical purposes, was considered by the pious as a device of
Satan. An ecclesiastic who, in company with an infidel, repaired to a secular
place to examine the position of the stars with such an instrument, was
compelled to perform penance for at least a year. "Presbyter cum quodam infami,
ad priuatum locum accessit, ea non intentione, vt vocaret dxmonium, sed vt in-
spectione astrolabij furtum cuiusdam Eccleslx posset recuperari."
"Mandamus quatenus talem ei pro expiatione illius delicti pcenitentiam vm-ponas
quod per annum, & amplius." (Ibid.,2.)
Witchcraft in England, like adultery, was, before the enactment of Stat. I,
James I, c. 12, exclusively subject to ecclesiastical jurisdiction, the offence
not be-
decurions, where they have previously consulted the Emperor, and acted by his
order; unless the tumult could not otherwise have been suppressed.
17. Paulus, Sentences, Book V.
If a man after having been struck in a quarrel dies, the blow given by each of
the persons assembled should be investigated.1

* 48.IX. CONCERNING THE POMPEIAN LAW ON PARRICIDES.

1. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIV.
It is provided by the Pompeian Law relating to Parricides that if anyone kills
his father, his mother, his grandfather, his grandmother, his brother, his
sister, his paternal uncle, his paternal aunt, his ma-
ing punishable at Common Law, for the reason that these practices being secret,
and no overt act of violence having been committed, a trial could not take
place. This statute made the invocation of evil spirits and the employment of
"any manner of witchcraft, sorcery, charm, or enchantment," felony without
benefit of clergy. The well-known case of Amy Duny and Rose Cullenden, who were
tried and found guilty before Lord Hale, affords a fair example of prosecutions
for witchcraft, and of the mass of absurdities, hearsay, contradictions, and
evident perjury upon which convictions were, in that age usually obtained.
(VideHutch-inson, An Historical Essay concerning Witchcraft, Chap. Vill.) The
credulity of even educated persons was boundless, and the more improbable an
occurrence, the greater claim it had to popular acceptance and belief, "The
more absurd and unaccountable these Actions seem, the greater Confirmations are
they to me of the Truth of those Relations, and the Reality of what the
Objectors would destroy." (Glanvil, A Full and Plain Evidence concerning
Witches and Apparitions, Sec. III.)
The practice of witchcraft was punishable as a crime under the laws of England
until the year 1736.
The Puritan refugees to New England after the Restoration, brought with them
the sanguinary prejudices and traditions which had rendered the era of the
Commonwealth memorable in the annals of persecution for sorcery and divination,
where, from 1644 to 1650, at least one hundred and nine persons were put to
death for alleged encouragement of, or participation in these forbidden
practices. (VideHutchinson, An Historical Essay concerning Witchcraft, Chap.
II.) The ground had already been well prepared for those fanatics who, in their
eagerness for the punishment of imaginary crimes, failed to consider their own
sufferings in behalf of religious principle, and the voluntary exile they had
undergone for the purpose of entertaining and asserting their opinions without
molestation. The laws they sanctioned and enforced were fully as severe as any
of those which had preceded them elsewhere. "If any man or woman bee a Witch,
that is, hath or consulteth with a familiar spirritt, they shall bee put to
death." (The Code of 1650, Capitale Lawes.)---ED.
1 The sicarius,so called from the sica,or dagger, with which he was constantly
armed---a habit which he has transmitted to his Italian descendants---was the
professional cutthroat of Roman society, the legitimate progenitor of the
mediaeval and modern bravo, whose services were always at the disposal of the
highest bidder.
The sicawas a long, curved weapon resembling a scimitar, whose shape rendered
it easy of concealment under the clothing. Sieariirarely operated singly, but
were organized in bands, and the murders and depredations perpetrated by
ternal uncle, his maternal aunt, his cousin of either sex, his wife, her
husband, his son-in-law, his father-in-law, his stepfather, his stepson, his
stepdaughter, his patron, or his patroness, or causes this to be done with
malicious intent, he shall be liable to the penalty prescribed by the Cornelian
Law relating to Assassins. A mother, who kills her son or her daughter, is also
liable to the penalty of this law, as well as a grandfather who kills his
grandson. Again, anyone who purchases poison for the purpose of administering
it to his father is liable, even if he does not give it to him.
2. Scsevola, Rules, Book IV.
A brother of the guilty party, who was aware of the plan, and did not warn his
father, was relegated, and the physician subjected to punishment.
3. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIV.
It must be remembered that cousins are included in the Pompeian Law, but those
are not equally implicated who are in the same, or a nearer degree. Also,
mothers-in-law and women who have been betrothed are omitted; they are,
however, included in accordance with the meaning of the law.
4. The Same, On Public Prosecutions, Book I.
Just as the fathers and mothers of married persons are embraced in the
designation fathers and mothers-in-law, so the husbands of the children are
embraced in the term sons-in-law.
5. The Same, Institutes, Book XIV,
It is said that the Divine Hadrian, in a case where a certain man had, while
hunting, killed his son who had committed adultery with his stepmother, caused
him to be deported to an island, on the ground that he killed him rather as a
thief than by asserting his right as a father; for paternal authority should
rather be influenced by affection than by cruelty.
6. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book Vill.
The question may be asked whether those who kill their parents, or know of the
crime, should be punished for parricide. Msecianus says that not only
parricides, but also their accomplices, should undergo this penalty. Hence the
accomplices, even if they are strangers, are punished in the same way.
7. The Same, On the Edict, Book XXIX.
When money has been furnished for the commission of a crime, with the knowledge
of a creditor, where, for instance, it has been given to
them finally became so frequent and alarming that, during the dictatorship of
Sylla, the Lex Cornelia de Sicariis Veneficis et Paricidiiswas enacted with a
view to terminating these disorders, as well as to curb the activities of
poisoners, whose crimes and the impunity which they enjoyed were no less
destructive of public order.---ED.
purchase poison, or paid to robbers or assassins for the purpose of killing his
father, he who obtained the money will be liable to the penalty for parricide,
as well as those who lent it, or took measures to have it used in this way.
8. The Same, Disputations, Book Vill.
Where anyone accused of parricide dies before being convicted, even if he kills
himself, he should have the Treasury as his successor, or if not, anyone whom
he appointed by his will. If he should die intestate, he will have as heirs
those who are designated by law.
9. Modestinus, Pandects, Book XII.
The penalty of parricide, as prescribed by our ancestors, is that the culprit
shall be beaten with rods stained with his blood, and then shall be sewed up in
a sack with a dog, a cock, a viper, and an ape, and the bag cast into the depth
of the sea, that is to say, if the sea is near at hand; otherwise, it shall be
thrown to wild beasts, according to the Constitution of the Divine Hadrian.
(1) Those who kill other persons than their father and mother, their
grandfather and grandmother, whom we have stated above, are punished according
to the custom of our ancestors, either suffer a capital penalty, or are
sacrificed to the gods.1
(2) When anyone, while insane, kills his parents, he shall go unpunished, as
the Divine Brothers stated in a Rescript with reference to a man who, being
insane, killed his mother; for it is sufficient for him to be punished by his
insanity alone, but he must be guarded with great care, or else be kept in
chains.
1 Two degrees of homicide, one prompted by malice, and the other committed
without it, thus corresponding to the murder and manslaughter of the English
Law, were known to the Romans. The first of these was punished capitally by
Numa Pompilius; the second might be expiated and the victim's family appeased
by sacrificing a ram. "Si qui hominem libervm dolo sciens morti dvit paracidas
esto." "Si quis imprudens occidisset hominem,, pro capite occisi agnatis eius
in eon-tione offeret arietem." (Fontes luris Romani Antejustiniani, Leges
RegiesII, 16, 17.)
These provisions were afterwards incorporated in the Laws of the Twelve Tables.
No very definite or specific legislation concerning homicide was ever enacted
by the Romans, as the crime was usually included with others of a religious
character, all being embraced in the term "paricidium."
The Lex Cornelia de sicariis, veneficis et paricidis,introduced and promulgated
by Sylla, formed the basis of subsequent laws on the subject, and was passed
because of the destructive activity of professional assassins and poisoners,
whose services were notoriously for sale, and whom long immunity had rendered
so bold as to make their plots a serious menace to society and the State.
As in the case of murder at Common Law, the intention was an essential element
of the crime, and, indeed, its most important constituent; for if the design to
kill was disclosed by the use of a lethal weapon, even though it may not have
been realized, the offence was held to be complete, and the liability of the
culprit was established.
The provisions of the Lex Corneliawere not only applicable to acts of
assassination by violence or treachery, but also to cases where the end of the
murderer was attained by means of perjury, or the connivance of a venal or
prejudiced
10. Paulus, On the Penalties of All Laws.
The accusation of those who are liable to the penalty of parricide is always
permitted.

* 48.X. CONCERNING THE CORNELIAN LAW ON DECEIT AND THE LIBONIAN DECREE OF THE SENATE.

1. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIV.
The penalty of the Cornelian Law is inflicted upon anyone who, with malicious
intent, has suborned false witnesses, or caused spurious evidence to be
introduced.
(1) Likewise, anyone who receives money, or makes an agreement to receive it,
for the purpose of fraudulently obtaining legal assistance or evidence, or
forms a conspiracy to render innocent persons liable, is punished by the Decree
of the Senate.
magistrate. Accidental homicide, as well as the killing of a human being in
self-defence, or in the protection of one's relatives, was not punishable at
Civil Law, insidiatorem iure interfici posse."When death resulted from gross
negligence, or the act was committed in the heat of passion, the penalty was
arbitrary and left to the discretion of the magistrate, who, in rendering
judgment, was governed by the circumstances of each particular case.
Homicide was also justifiable where a man caught an adulterer in his own house;
but, to be entitled to immunity he was required to publish what he had done,
and repudiate his wife within three days. The rule, however, was only
applicable to slaves, freedmen, and persons of infamous character. A father was
permitted to kill an adulterer taken flagrante delictowith his daughter, in his
own home, or in that of his son-in-law, provided he put both to death. Homicide
se defendendowas always justifiable. Cicero concisely and forcibly states the
opinion of jurists as to the innate and indisputable right of self-protection
entertained by the jurists of his time.
"Est igitur hxc, indices, non scripta, sed nata lex, quam non didicimus, ac-
cepimus, legvmus, verum ex natura ipsa arripuimus, hausimus, expressimus, ad
quam non decit, sed facti, non instituti, sed imbuti sumus, ut, si vita nostra
in aliquas insidias, si in vim, et in tela aut latronum aut inwnicorum
incidisset, omnis honesta ratio esset expediendx salutis." (Pro. T. Annio
Milone Oratio,IV, X.)
In the early ages of Roman jurisprudence, deliberate murder was not a capital
offence, and a great distinction was subsequently made by imposing sentence for
this crime. Persons of rank were subject to deportation and the confiscation of
their property, and only those of inferior degree were condemned to death.
Murdrum,the Saxon and German "mord" originally implied Concealment, and in time
became synonymous with secret assassination. The term also signified the fine
imposed upon the district, or borough, when the culprit was not apprehended.
The amount prescribed was fifty-six marks, forty of which were paid to the
king, and six to the family of the victim. If the murderer was brought to
justice within a year afterwards, the amount was refunded. "Quando aliquis
alieubi murdritus reperiebatur, querebatur apud villam, nisi inveniebatur
interfector illius; et si inveniri poterat, justicie regis infraVill, dies
interfectionis tradebatur." "Et si non inveniebatur colligebantur in villaXLVI
marce." "Quod si infra annum posset murdritor inveniri, fieret de eo justicia,
et ipsi rehaberent marcas suas."(Ancient Laws and Institutes of England, Leges
Regis Edwardi ConfessorisXV.)
In England, almost as late as the thirteenth century, in cases of both
accidental homicide and self-defence, the king decided whether punishment
should be
(2) Moreover, anyone who receives money for the production or the suppression
of witnesses, and the giving or withholding of testimony, is punished by the
Cornelian Law; and also anyone who corrupts a judge, or takes any steps for the
purpose of corrupting him.
(3) If, however, a judge neglects to enforce the Imperial Constitutions he will
be punished.
(4) Those who have been guilty of deceit with reference to accounts, wills,
public documents, or anything else which is not sealed,
inflicted, or a pardon granted. Thus it is clear that the doctrine of blood-
feud and compensation still prevailed. (VidePollock and Mattland, A History of
English Law, Vol. II, Page 463.)
The two species of homicide are succinctly defined by Glanvil, who also refers
to the duty of vengeance enjoined upon the heir, which was such a prominent
feature in Roman criminal legislation.
"Duo autem sunt genera homicidii, unum est quod dicitur Murdrum, quod nullo
vidente nulla sciente, clam perpetratur, prseter solum interfectorem & ejus
complices, ita quod max non assequatur clamor popularis juxta assisam super hoc
proditam. In hujusmodi autem accusatione non admittitur aliquis nisi fuerit de
consanguinitate ipsius defuncti, & tune ita quod propinquior stipiti remotiorem
a dirationatione excludat. Est et aliud Homicidium quod constat in generali
vocab-ulo & dicitur simplex homicidium."(Glanvil, Tractatus de Legibus &
Consue-tudinibus AngliseXIV, 3.)
Britton speaks of murder undertaken for reward or some other motive, and
effected through judicial condemnation by false testimony; a form of the
offence evidently derived from the Roman Law, but not since recognized as such
by English jurisprudence: "In jure non remota causa sed proximo, spectatur."
"Ceux auxi que fauxement pur lower, ou en auter manner ount ascun home damme ou
fait damner au mart." (De Juribus Anglicanis14.) (VideStephen, A Digest of
Criminal Law XXIII, Art. 221.)
The Common Law definition of murder, as given by Coke, is the one accepted in
England and America. "Murder is when a man of sound memory, and of the age of
discretion, unlawfully killeth within any county of the realm any reasonable
creature in rerum naturaunder the king's peace, with malice fore-thought,
either expressed by the party, or implied by law." (Institutes III, 7.)
The legislators of Continental Europe, in accordance with the doctrine of the
Civil Law, regarded the killing of relatives in either the ascending or
descending line as one of the most aggravating features of homicide. To
constitute murder, premeditation is necessary. In France, when this is proved,
or lying in wait is established, the crime is called assassination. A similar
rule prevails in Spain and Italy. Death resulting from the administration of
poison is known as assassination in Austria. In Germany, however, this form of
homicide is not a capital offence. The Swedish Code has a triple classification
of murder, dependent upon complete guilt, or when there are attending
circumstances, or when serious provocation existed. (Code Penal(France), Arts.
295-301, Codigo Penal(Spain), Arts. 417-421, Codice Penale(Italy), Arts. 364-
368, Codigo Penal Portugues(Portugal), Arts. 368-369, Strafgesetzbuch fur das
Deutsche Reich(Germany), Arts. 211-222, Allgetneines Strafgesetz(Austria),
Arts. 135-136, Sveriges Rikes Lag(Sweden) XIV, 1, 2, 3.)
The law of the United States follows that of England in the general
classification of the different kinds of homicide. Malice and premeditation are
in every instance presumed, the burden of proof for the removal of this
presumption and the establishment of facts in extenuation or justification of
the act being imposed upon the defendant. Both murder and manslaughter are
felonious and constitute but a single offence; the legal degree of guilt being
determined by the circumstances of each case. When one person kills another at
the latter's request it is murder, although the ordinarily essential element of
malice may not exist. When death occurs as a result of the intentional
administration of poison, malice is al-
or have fraudulently appropriated property, shall be punished for these crimes,
just as if they had committed forgery. It was for just such an offence that the
Divine Severus condemned the Prefect of Egypt, under the Cornelian Law relating
to Deceit, because during the time when he governed the province he had
falsified his own records.
(5) He who opens the will of a person who is living is liable to the penalty of
the Cornelian Law.
ways presumed. In several states, homicide committed while in the perpetration
of a felony, such, for instance, as burglary, is murder. Premeditation,
deliberation, and a motive must be proved to obtain conviction. The absence of
these requisites constitutes the crime of manslaughter. (VideWharton, A
Treatise on Criminal Law, Vol. I, Secs. 417-420.) This offence has been divided
and subdivided by statutory enactments into innumerable degrees, many of which
are entirely arbitrary, and not recognized by the Common Law. Such legislation,
with the infinite opportunities it affords for technical discussion and sharp
practice by cunning and unscrupulous attorneys, is one great cause of the
immunity enjoyed by criminals, which has long been a reproach to our
jurisprudence, and is a constant menace to the rights of person and property in
this country. Add to this the sentimental admiration manifested by women for
the most cruel and notorious criminals, and the persistent and successful
efforts of hypocritical reformers, whose inconsistency is conspicuously
displayed in endeavors to secure immunity for murderers, while they, at the
same time, attempt to restrict the liberty of law-abiding citizens by
forbidding under drastic penalties their indulgence in innocent diversions; and
the appalling increase of homicide, as well as the security enjoyed by its
perpetrators, may be largely accounted for. The general disinclination of the
courts to punish violators of the law, especially when they have the means to
employ able counsel, is another important factor responsible for this shocking
and inexcusable miscarriage of criminal justice. Statistics of undoubted
authenticity disclose an amazing and almost incredible state of affairs. During
the years 1916, 1917, 1918, there were 23,842 felonious homicides committed in
the United States, and only 285 executions, that is to say, a little more than
one per cent. In New York City alone, from October 1 to November 21, 1920,
forty murders were perpetrated, an average of one every thirty and a half
hours, and a year afterwards none of the malefactors responsible for them had
paid the extreme penalty. In Detroit, in 1917, there were eighty-nine murders
and fourteen convictions; in 1918, seventy-one felonious homicides and twenty-
two convictions; very few oi which incurred first degree punishment. This
condition is, by no means, confined to densely populated communities. In 1907,
in Oregon, fifty-six culpable homicides took place, and of those but one first
degree conviction is recorded. (VideFos-dick, American Police Systems, Chap.
I.)
In England, whence the principles of our criminal jurisprudence are entirely
derived, trials for homicide are certain, swift, and conclusive; uninfluenced
by political interference; unaccompanied with unseemly demonstrations of
feminine sympathy for assassins; divested of trivial pretexts to obtain delay,
and unprofessional expedients to hamper, retard, and thwart the course of
justice.
The tribunals of Continental Europe, especially those of Italy, are somewhat
more lenient in their treatments of homicidal criminals than those of Great
Britain; still, in all of them, the punishment of the law-breaker is sure
eventually to be exacted.
The cases above stated are not isolated ones; the evil, as is well known, is
widespread and national. It has been increasing in extent and seriousness for
years. It is but one of the many manifestations of the disregard of law, and
contempt for its observance, which are all but universal throughout the United
States.
Among malefactors, the murderer seems to be a special subject of commiseration.
It is notorious that it is practically impossible to convict a woman of
felonious homicide under any circumstances. Some years ago, when it was so
frequent as to be almost epidemic for dissatisfied wives to shoot their
husbands- in the back
(6) He who alleges that documents deposited with another have been delivered by
him to his adversaries can be prosecuted for deceit.
(7) The Decree of the Senate applies to military wills, and by its terms anyone
is liable under the Cornelian Law who has written the bequest of a legacy or a
trust for his own benefit.
(8) There is this difference between the drawing up of a will by a son, a
slave, or a stranger; for, so far as the stranger is concerned, if the
signature of the testator is made, accompanied by the statement: "I dictated
this to So-and-So, and I have read it over," the penalty will not be incurred,
and the bequest can be claimed.
In the case of a son or a slave, however, a general signature will be
sufficient both for the purpose of avoiding the penalty, and of obtaining the
bequest.
(9) Guardians, as well as curators, who, after their term of office has
expired, do not render their accounts of the guardianship or cura-
while they were asleep, and then declare that they had committed suicide,
although many prosecutions ensued, all the defendants were acquitted.
Several causes contribute to this general disinclination to enforce the laws
and inflict the penalties they prescribe. The latent, inherited savage and
predatory instincts of human nature, which the late war proved were not
amenable to the restraints of long existent and highly perfected civilization,
is responsible for much of it. Again, the excitement of the sympathies and
prejudices of the unreflecting rabble by original bands of cranks and
professional agitators, animated solely by political or mercenary motives,
contribute a large and not unimportant share. But more than all other
causes---and one especially conspicuous during the last few years in the
ineffectual attempts at prohibition enforcement---is the enactment of sumptuary
legislation upon the most frivolous subjects---vastly increasing the mala
prohibita---with a view to making us good by statute, a measure shown by past
experience to be invariably and eternally foredoomed to failure. The greater
the number of such futile and unnecessary laws, the less respect is entertained
by the public for those which are indispensable for the preservation of
society. One of the worst features of these enactments is that they are adopted
against the real convictions of legislators, whose subserviency to corrupt and
ignoble dictation is solely inspired by their desire to remain in office.
Many deeds of violence resulting in homicide may be traced to the effect of the
infamous act known in New York as the "Sullivan Law," which, if not
intentionally passed in the direct interest of criminals, certainly
accomplishes that end by depriving the law-abiding citizen of the means of
defence.
The indulgence displayed by judges, jurors, and public prosecutors in the
treatment of persons guilty of culpable homicide should not be attributed to
individual bias, or misplaced compassion, for they are the agents of the
people, and their acts are merely the reflection of the sentiments of the
public in general. As the abuse is increasing under the tremendous impulse it
has received in recent years, it is difficult, indeed, to predict its ultimate
consequences; but there is no question that it strikes directly at the very
foundations of society and the existence of government. All attempts to
legislate against it must necessarily be useless. The remedy is education, but
education is a slow process, and in view of the present condition of the
popular mind offers but little hope of improvement. The hero-worship of the
murderer is paramount; the safety of the peaceful and industrious members of
the community is seemingly entitled to but little consideration. The ancient
maxim: "Mal-itiis hominiwm indulgendv/m non est,"is apparently obsolete; and
the statement in the preamble to the Constitution, that it was designed to
"establish justice, insure domestic tranquillity, and promote the general
welfare," is no longer applicable in the presence of the revolutionary and
destructive tendencies of the present age.--- ED.
torship, are liable to the penalty of this law---as was decided by the Divine
Severus and Antoninus---and they cannot contract with the Treasury; but if
anyone, in violation of this law, secretly makes an agreement with the
Treasury, he shall be punished just as if he had committed forgery.
(10) This Constitution, however, does not apply (as the Emperors themselves
have stated in Rescripts), to those who, before undertaking the guardianship,
have transacted business of this kind. For they are held to have given excuses,
but not to have been guilty of fraud.
(11) The same Emperors stated in a Rescript that anyone who has not yet
rendered an account of his guardianship or curatorship should not contract with
the Treasury while he whose guardianship has been administered is living; but
if the latter should die, he can legally contract with it, although he may not
yet have rendered his account to the heir.
(12) Where, however, the guardian or curator has succeeded by hereditary right
to a contract made with the Treasury, even if this occurs before an account has
been rendered, I do not think that there will be ground for the infliction of a
penalty; although the person whose guardianship or curatorship has been
administered may still be living.
(13) The penalty for forgery, or quasi-forgery, is deportation, and
confiscation of all property. When a slave commits any of these crimes, he
shall be condemned to death.
2. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book III.
He who has fraudulently appropriated a will, or concealed it, or taken it by
force, or erased or defaced it, or substituted another for it, or unsealed it;
or anyone who has forged a will, or sealed it, or fraudulently published it; or
anyone through whose fraudulent acts these things have been done, shall suffer
the penalty of the Cornelian Law.
3. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book IV.
Anyone who, not knowing that a will is forged, either enters upon an estate or
accepts a legacy, or acknowledges it in any way whatsoever, is not barred from
declaring in court that the will is forged.
4. The Same, Disputations, Book Vill.
Where anyone who caused a legacy to be fraudulently inserted into a will for
his own benefit dies, his heir can be deprived of it.
(1) Hence where a certain person, who had been appointed heir by his father,
had torn up a codicil, and then died, the Divine Marcus held that the Treasury
could claim the estate, to the amount to which the heir would have been
deprived by the codicil; that is to say three-fourths of the estate.
5. Julianus, Digest, Book LXXXVI.
The Senate remitted the penalty in the case of a person charged with the
payment of legacies who had taken them away by a codicil
written in his own hand. But because this had been done by the order of his
father, and he was under twenty-five years of age, he was also permitted to
take the estate.
6. Africanus, Questions, Book HI.
When anyone writes a bequest of a legacy to himself, he is liable to the
penalty of the Cornelian Law, although the legacy is void; for it is
established that he is liable who writes a bequest of a legacy to himself in a
will which is afterwards broken, even if it was not legally executed in the
beginning. This, however, is only true when the will is perfect, for if it
should not be sealed, the better opinion is that the Decree of the Senate will
not apply; just as there would be no ground for an interdict to compel the
production of the will; for it is necessary, in the first place, that there
should be a will of some kind, even if it was not drawn up according to law, in
order for the Decree of the Senate not to be applicable. For in order that a
will may be properly designated as forged, it is essential that, after the
forgery has been removed from it, it still can properly be called a will.
Therefore, in like manner, a will is said to be made contrary to law in which,
if all the regular formalities had been observed, it could be said that it was
legally executed.
(1) If the appointed heir has written the disinheritance of a son, or of any
other persons, mentioning them by name, he will be liable under the Decree of
the Senate.
(2) In like manner he who, with his own hand, has deprived the testator's slave
of freedom, and, above all, if he is charged with the payment of legacies, or
the execution of a trust, he will be liable under the Decree of the Senate.
(3) If a patron should write the bequest of a legacy in his own favor in the
will of his freedman, and, after having obtained pardon for doing so, he has
been ordered to relinquish the legacy, can he obtain the benefit of praetorian
possession contrary to the provisions of the will? The better opinion is that
he cannot do so. It does not, however, result from this that if a wife should
include the bequest of her dower for her benefit in a will, or a creditor
writes a bequest of what is due to him at a certain time, for his own benefit;
and, in like manner, having been pardoned, they are ordered to surrender the
legacies, an action for her dowry should not be refused to the woman, as well
as one for his claim to the creditor, in order that neither of them may be
deprived of that to which they are actually entitled.
7. Marcianus, Institutes, Book II.
Slaves cannot, under any circumstances, appear against their masters in court,
as they are not considered persons by either the Civil, the praetorian law, or
in extraordinary proceedings; except where, by way of favor, the Divine Marcus
and Commodus stated in a Rescript that when a slave complains that a will in
which freedom was granted him has been suppressed, he should be allowed to file
an accusation for suppressing it.
8. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book VII.
Anyone who scrapes gold coins, or stains them, or makes them, if he is a
freeman, shall be thrown to wild beasts; if he is a slave, he shall undergo the
extreme penalty.
9. The Same, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book Vill.
It is provided by the Cornelian Law that anyone who adds any alloy to gold, or
who makes base silver coins, is liable to punishment for forgery.
(1) He also is liable to the same penalty who, when he was able to prevent
these things, did not do so.
(2) It is provided by the same law that no one shall fraudulently purchase or
sell coins made of lead, or of any other base metal.
(3) The penalty of the Cornelian Law is inflicted upon him who knowingly and
fraudulently seals, or causes to be sealed, any other written instrument than a
will; as well as upon anyone who, with fraudulent intent, has brought together
persons for the purpose of giving false testimony, or who produces any false
evidence on one side or the other.
(4) Anyone who has suborned an informer in a case in which pecuniary interests
are involved is liable to the same penalty as those who have received money for
the sake of causing litigation.
10. Macer, Public Prosecutions, Book I.
Nothing is provided by the Decrees of the Senate with reference to a person who
has written something for the benefit of one who has control of him, or of
another who is under the same control. But the law is violated also in this
instance, because the profit derived from the act will belong to the father or
the master, who would be entitled to it if the son or the slave had written the
instrument for his own benefit.
(1) It is established that where anyone writes the bequest of a legacy for the
benefit of a stranger, even though he may afterwards, during the lifetime of
the testator, begin to have him under his control, there will be no ground for
the application of the Decree of the Senate.
11. Marcianus, On Public Prosecutions, Book I.
If a father should write anything for the benefit of his son, who is a soldier,
and under his control, and with whom he himself is serving, and he knows this
to be the case, for the reason that nothing is acquired by the father, he will
not be liable to punishment.
(1) Where a son had written a clause for the benefit of his mother, the Divine
Brothers stated in a Rescript that as he had done this by order of the
testator, he should go unpunished, and that his mother was entitled to the
bequest.
12. Papinianus, Opinions, Book XIII.
Where anyone accused of fraud dies before the accusation of the crime has been
filed, or judgment has been rendered, the Cornelian
Law does not apply, because what was acquired by the crime is not left to the
heir.
13. The Same, Opinions, Book XV.
The solemn assertion of a false name or surname is punished with the penalty of
forgery.
(1) An advocate having been degraded for ten years from his rank of decurion,
because he read a forged document in the presence of the Governor while hearing
a case, I gave it as my opinion that'he would recover his rank after the
expiration of the time, as he did not come within the terms of the Cornelian
Law, having read, but not drawn up a forged document.
For the same reason, when a plebeian is punished with temporary exile for the
same cause, he can legally be created a decurion after his return.
14. Paulus, Questions, Book XXII.
An emancipated son, while writing his father's will by the order of the latter,
drew up the bequest of a legacy to a slave owned in common by himself and
Titius. I ask how this question should be decided. The answer was, you have
combined several questions; and under the Decree of the Senate by which we are
forbidden to write the bequest of a legacy to ourselves or to those whom we
have under our control, the said emancipated son will be liable to the same
penalty, even though he wrote the bequest by the order of his father; for he is
considered to be excused who is under the control of another, just as is the
case with a slave, provided the order of the testator is evident from his
signature; for I have ascertained that this was the intention of the Senate.
(1) The next question is, as it has been decided that anything that is
unlawfully written is considered not to have been written at all, shall what
was inserted for the benefit of a slave owned in common by the writer and
another be considered as not written at all; or only that which has reference
to the person who did the writing, so that the entire amount will be due to the
other joint-owner? I found that Marcellus had made a note on Julianus, for as
Julianus has stated, if someone inserted a clause for the benefit of Titius and
himself, or for that of a slave owned in common, and it should be considered as
not inserted at all, it would be very easy to ascertain how much was acquired
by Titius and his joint-owner. Marcellus added that the other joint-owner would
be entitled to the amount, just as if the name of the slave had been omitted on
account of its being false. This rule should be observed in deciding the
present question.
(2) A husband manumitted a dotal slave, and in his will inserted the bequest of
a legacy to him. The question arose, what could the woman recover under the
Julian Law? I answered that it must be said that the patron, as well as the
emancipated son, was liable to the penalty of the Edict of the Divine Claudius,
although if they should die, pra?torian possession of their estates could be
demanded. Hence,
if the patron did not obtain anything from the estate of the freedman,   he
would not be liable to an action by the woman.
But would he be liable for the reason that it was added in the law, "Or
committed any fraudulent act to prevent it from coming into his hands"? He,
however, did not commit any fraud against the woman, for merely to have formed
this design was not doing anything to her disadvantage. Therefore, should we
not grant an action to the woman, as the husband will be obliged to make
restitution? But if he who wrote the bequest of the legacy by order of the
testator had also, at the same time, by the order of the testator, entered into
an agreement to deliver it to another, the Senate directed that he must,
nevertheless, relinquish his legacy, and that it should remain in the hands of
the heir, together with the charge of the trust.
15. Callistratus, Questions, Book I.
The Divine Claudius ordered by an Edict that the following should be added to
the Cornelian Law: "If anyone, while writing the will or the codicil of
another, should insert with his own hand the bequest of a legacy to himself, he
shall be liable, just as if he had violated the Cornelian Law; and no pardon
shall be granted to those who pretend to have been ignorant of the severity of
the Edict."
Not only one who has drawn up the bequest of a legacy for his own benefit, with
his own hand, is considered to have done so; but also he who, through the
agency of his slave, or his son who is under his control, is honored by a
legacy at the dictation of the testator.
(1) It is clearly provided by the Imperial Constitutions that if a testator
specifically states, over his signature, that he has dictated to a slave
belonging to anyone, that a legacy should be paid the master of the latter by
his own heirs, the bequest will be valid; but the general signature of the
testator will not avail against the authority of the Decree of the Senate, and
therefore the bequest will be considered as not having been written, and the
slave who wrote it for his own benefit should be pardoned. I think, however,
that it would be safer for pardon to be asked from the Emperor, of course after
the parties interested have relinquished their claim to what was left to them.
(2) The Senate likewise decreed that if a slave, by the order of his master,
should write the bequest of his own freedom in a will or a codicil, for the
very reason that it is written with his own hand he will not become free; but
freedom can be granted to him under the terms of a trust, provided that, after
the writing had been done, the testator signed the will or the codicil with his
own hand.
(3) And as only the kind of freedom acquired by means of a trust was embraced
in this Decree of the Senate, the Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that the
spirit of the Decree, rather than the letter of the same should be followed;
for when slaves obey their masters, they are excused through the necessity of
the power to which they are subjected; but when the authority of the master is
added, he having stated over his signature that he had dictated and read what
had been written, he says that it is considered to have been written by the
hand of the master himself, when this had been done by his desire. This,
however, should not be extended so as to include free persons over whom the
testator has no right. Still, it must be ascertained whether the same necessity
for obedience did not exist, and whether those who did not comply had an
honorable excuse when they failed to do what was not permitted.
(4) It was decided that pardon for violating the Cornelian Law should also be
granted to a mother, for whose benefit the bequest of a legacy had been written
by her slave at the dictation of her son.
(5) The Senate also made the same decision with reference to a daughter who, at
the dictation of her mother, through ignorance of the law, wrote a bequest to
herself.
(6) If anyone, after having appointed two heirs, should add that if either one
of them died without leaving children, the estate should be given to the
survivor, if he had children, but if both should die without any, the estate
(what follows was written in another hand) should be given to the person who
wrote the will: it is held that he who wrote the will should be released from
the penalty of the Cornelian Law; but it would be more beneficent to permit him
to acquire what has been mentioned above.
16. Paulus, Opinions, Book III.
Answered that the offence of having purloined written instruments is not a
cause for public prosecution, unless it is proved that the will of someone has
been stolen.
(1) Paulus gave it as his opinion that all those who sealed any forged
instrument whatsoever, with the exception of wills, were liable to the penalty
of the Cornelian Law.
(2) And also others who have made false entries in registers, public documents,
or anything else of the kind, without sealing them, or, in order to prevent the
truth from being known, have concealed or stolen anything, or made a
substitution, or unsealed a paper, there is no doubt that it is customary for
them to be punished with the same penalty.
17. The Same, Trusts, Book III.
When anyone writes a bequest of a slave for his benefit, with his own hand, and
is requested to manumit him, the Senate decided that he should be manumitted by
all the heirs.
18. The Same, Sentences, Book III.
We are not forbidden to write a bequest for the benefit of a wife in another's
will.
(1) He who appoints himself the testamentary guardian of a minor child of the
testator, although he is considered liable to suspicion for the reason that he
seems to have aimed at the guardianship, still, if he is approved as being
suitable, he should be appointed guardian, not under the will but by a decree
of the magistrate; nor should any excuse given by him be accepted, because he
is held to have consented to the wishes of the testator.
19. The Same, Sentences, Book V.
Those who have struck counterfeit money, but have not seemed disposed to
entirely finish it, shall be released where evidence of a true repentance has
been manifested.
(1) The accusation of having introduced a supposititious child is not barred by
any prescription; and it makes no difference whether the woman alleged to have
made the substitution is dead, or not.
20. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book VI.
Those also are punished with the penalty of forgery of wills who have accepted
money for the purpose of causing litigation by means of legal assistance, or
the production of witnesses; or have caused obligations-to be contracted, or
agreements to be made; or have formed an association; or have taken any
measures to enable this to be done.
21. Paulus, On the Turpillian Decree of the Senate.
Anyone who has sold the same entire property to two different persons under
separate contracts is punished with the penalty for forgery of wills; and this
was decided by the Divine Hadrian.
He also is placed in the same category who has corrupted a judge; but it is
usual to punish such persons less severely, as they are relegated for a certain
time, and are not deprived of their property.
22. The Same, On the Libonian Decree of the Senate.
A child under the age of puberty should not be said to come within the scope of
this Edict, for he can hardly be liable for the crime of forgery, as he is not
capable of criminality at that age.
(1) If a father writes a bequest for the benefit of his son, who is in the
hands of the enemy, it must be said that on his return his father will be
liable to the penalty of the Decree of the Senate; but if he had died in
captivity, his father would have been considered innocent.
(2) If, however, he should write a bequest for the benefit of his emancipated
son, he can do this legally; and the same rule applies to a son given in
adoption.
(3) Likewise, if he has written one for the benefit of his slave, to whom he is
in default in granting freedom under the terms of a trust, it must be said that
he is not liable under the terms of the Decree of the Senate, as it is
established that everything acquired by means of a slave of this kind must be
delivered to him after he has been manumitted.
(4) If he has written a bequest for the benefit of a slave who is serving him
in good faith, he is guilty so far as his intention is concerned; because he
wrote it for the benefit of one who he thought belonged to him. But as neither
a legacy nor an estate is acquired by a bona fidepossessor, we hold that he
should be exempt from the penalty.
(5) Where a master writes a bequest for the benefit of his slave, "when he
shall become free," we say that the master is not affected
by the Decree of the Senate, as he in no way had his own interests in view.
The same rule applies to a son subsequently emancipated.
(6) Anyone who confirms a codicil, made before a will, in which a legacy was
bequeathed to him, comes within the terms of the Decree of the Senate; as
Julianus, also, has stated.
(7) A person becomes liable to the penalty by taking anything away, just as he
does when he gives anything to himself; for instance, where a slave was
bequeathed to him, and also was manumitted, he deprives him of his liberty with
his own hands. This is the case, even if he deprives him of it in accordance
with the wish of the testator, for if he is ignorant of the fact, the grant of
freedom will be valid.
The same rule will apply if, having been asked to pay a legacy with which he
was charged, he erases the clause creating the trust!
(8) Anyone who, with his own hand, writes the assignment of a freedman, is
liable, not according to the letter, but according to the spirit of the Decree
of the Senate.
(9) In like manner, a slave who writes a bequest of freedom to himself, under a
trust, in the will of another, is not included in the terms of the Decree of
the Senate. A doubt may arise on this point, however, for (as we stated above),
the Senate only remits the penalty in the case of a slave who has written a
bequest of freedom for himself under a trust, in the will of his master, when
the latter has stated the fact over his signature. And, indeed, there is still
more reason to hold that he violates the Decree of the Senate to a greater
extent than he who writes the bequest of a legacy to himself, as, under no
circumstances, will he be entitled to his freedom, but he can acquire the
legacy for his master.
(10) If the person who writes the will should grant freedom under a trust to
his own slave, let us see whether he is not free from the penalty, as he
obtains no advantage, unless he did this in order that the slave might be
purchased from him at an exorbitant price, in order to be manumitted.
(11) He, also, who, when a tract of land was devised to Titius, added with his
own hand, as a condition, that money should be paid to him, comes within the
terms of the Decree of the Senate.
(12) He who, with the consent of his father, disinherits himself, or deprives
himself of a legacy, is not liable, either according to the letter or the
spirit of the Decree of the Senate.
23. The Same, On the Penalties of Civilians.
The question is asked, what is a forgery ? It is held to occur where anyone
imitates the handwriting of another, or omits anything from a document, or an
account, when he copies it; and not where a false result is given in a
calculation, or an account.
24. Scsevola, Digest, Book XXII.
Aithales, a slave, to whom freedom and a portion of his estate was left by the
will of Vetitus Callinicus, his master, under the terms
of a trust, with which the heirs appointed to eleven-twelfths of the estate
were charged; stated to Maximilia, the daughter of the testator, who was
appointed heir to a twelfth of the estate, that he could produce evidence to
show that the will of Vetitus Callinicus was forged; and, having been
interrogated by Maximilia before a magistrate, he declared that he would prove
in what way the will had been forged. Maximilia signed an accusation of forgery
against the writer of the will and Proculus, her co-heir, and the case having
been heard, the Prefect of the City decided that the will was not forged, and
ordered that the twelfth of the estate belonging to Maximilia should be
forfeited to the Treasury.
The question arose whether Aithales was entitled to his freedom, and if the
trust should be executed after this decision. The answer was that, in
accordance with the facts stated, this was the case.
25. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book VII.
He who is alleged to have given forged letters in the name of the Prsetor, or
to have promulgated a forged Edict, is liable to a penal action in factum,even
though he may have been prosecuted under the Cornelian Law.
26. Marcellus, Digest, Book XXX.
Where anyone has destroyed the will of his father, and acts as heir at law,
just as if his father had died intestate, and then himself dies, it is
perfectly just that the entire estate of his father should be taken from his
heir.
27. Modestinus, Rules, Book Vill.
He declares that those who have given conflicting evidence between themselves
are liable under the terms of the law as having committed
forgery.
(1) It was also decided that he who gives false testimony against his own seal,
is liable to the penalty for forgery. With reference to the impudence of a
person who has testified differently in favor of two persons, and whose faith
is so double and vacillating, there is no doubt whatever that he is liable for
the crime of forgery.1
(2) He who falsely represents himself to be a soldier, or makes use of
decorations to which he is not entitled, or travels under a forged permit,
should be severely dealt with, according to the nature of the offence
committed.
1The crimen falsiof the Romans, as appears from the text, included what we
understand as perjury, as well as forgery, counterfeiting, and the
falsification of documents, and especially of wills. Perjury, at Civil Law, was
rather a religious than a secular offence, and consisted in the invocation of
the genius of the Emperor, or one of the gods, to establish a false assertion.
Where an appeal to the majesty of the sovereign was involved, a severe penalty
was originally prescribed, but was afterwards remitted: in the other case, the
delinquent was left to the vengeance of the offended deity. "Jurisjurandi
contempta religio satis Deum ultorem habet. Peri-culum autem corporis, vel
majestatis crimen, secundum constituta divorwm paren-tum meorum, etsi per
principis venerationem quodam calore fuerit pejeratum, inferri non placet."
(Code IV, I, 2.)---ED.
28. The Same, Opinions, Book IV.
If an older date than the correct one is stated by a debtor in the obligation
of a pledge, there will be ground for an accusation for crimen falsi.
29. The Same, On Select Cases.
Where anyone deceives the Governor of a province either by means of documents,
or filing of petitions, it will be of no advantage to him; and moreover, if he
is prosecuted, he must pay the penalty of his rashness, just as if he had
committed forgery. There are rescripts extant on this point. It is sufficient
for the sake of proof to give a single instance, which is as follows:
"Alexander Augustus to Julius Maryllus. If your adversary, in the petition
which he filed, did not assert what was true in the request made by him, he
cannot avail himself of the instrument which he signed; and, moreover, if he is
accused, he must suffer the penalty."
30. The Same, Pandects, Book XII.
He who makes or carves a false seal is liable under the Cornelian Law relating
to Wills.
(1) In case of the substitution of a child, the parents alone, or those who
have an interest in the matter, are entitled to bring the accusation, but none
of the people can institute a public prosecution.
31. Callistratus, On Judicial Inquiries, Book III.
The Divine Pius stated in a Rescript addressed to Claudius: "Any persons who
introduce instruments into court which cannot be proved shall be punished
according to the nature of each offence; or, if they seem to have deserved a
more serious penalty than can be imposed upon them under this jurisdiction, the
facts may be stated to the Emperor, in order that he may determine what
punishment shall be inflicted upon them."
The Emperor Marcus, along with his Brother, however, influenced by feelings of
humanity, mitigated this punishment; so that if, (as frequently happens), such
documents should be produced by mistake, those who did anything of this kind
may be pardoned.
32. Modestinus, On Punishments, Book I.
At present, those who fraudulently alter any Edicts which have been promulgated
are punished with the penalty of forgery.
(1) If a vendor or a purchaser changes any measures used for wine, grain, or
anything of this kind which have been publicly approved, or, with malicious
intent, commits any other fraudulent act, he shall be condemned to pay double
the value of the property; and it was provided by a Decree of the Divine
Hadrian that those who used false weights or measures should be relegated to an
island.

33. The Same, On Punishm'ents, Book III.
If anyone should make use of forged constitutions, without giving any authority
for doing so, he will be forbidden the use of water and fire under the
Cornelian Law.

* 48.XI. CONCERNING THE JULIAN LAW ON EXTORTION.

1. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIV.
The Julian Law on Extortion has reference to money received by someone who
holds the position of magistrate, or who is invested with some degree of power,
or administration, or with the office of deputy, or any other public employment
or occupation whatsoever; and also applies to the attendants of the above-
mentioned dignitaries.
(1) The law excepts those from whom it is permitted to receive money, for
instance, from cousins, from near relatives, and from a wife.

2. Scsevola, Rules, Book IV.
Under this law, an action is granted against heirs, but only within a year
after the death of the person who was accused.

3. Macer, Public Prosecutions, Book I.
He is liable under the Julian Law relating to Extortion who, while invested
with any authority, accepts money for rendering a judgment or decree;

4. Venuleius Saturninus, Public Prosecutions, Book HI.Or for doing more or less
than he was obliged to do in the performance of his official duty.

5. Macer, Public Prosecutions, Book I.
The attendants of judges can also be prosecuted under this law.

6. Venuleius Saturninus, Public Prosecutions, Book I.Those are liable under the
same law who receive money either for testifying, or for not testifying.
(1) He who is convicted under this law is forbidden to testify in public, or to
be a judge, or to prosecute a crime.
(2) It is provided by the Julian Law relating to Extortion that: "No one shall
take money for the purpose of enlisting or discharging a soldier, nor shall
anyone accept money for giving his opinion in the Senate or in a public
council, or to accuse, or not to accuse anyone; and city magistrates must
abstain from all kinds of corruption, and not receive in gifts or presents more
than a hundred aureiduring the entire year."

7. Macer, Public Prosecutions, Book I.
The Julian Law on Extortion prescribes that: "No one shall receive anything as
an inducement to render a judgment or a decree, or for changing his opinion; or
to prevent him from rendering a decision; or to throw a person into prison, or
put him in chains; or order him
to be chained, or delivered from his chains; or to convict or acquit a man; or
to appraise the amount of a judgment; or to sentence anyone to a capital or a
pecuniary penalty, or to refrain from doing so."
(1) It is, however, apparent that the law permits all those, excepting such as
have been excepted, to receive money without limit; but those enumerated in
this Section are not allowed to receive anything from anybody.
(2) It is also provided: "That no public work which is to be constructed shall
be accepted as completed, nor any public provisions which are to be distributed
held to be transferred or obtained, nor any buildings considered as repaired,
before they have been finished, accepted, and delivered according to law."
(3) Persons guilty of extortion are at present arbitrarily dealt with by the
law, and they are generally punished with exile, or even more severely,
according to the crime which they have committed.
What, however, should be done if they accept money as a reward for killing a
man? Or even if they do not accept it, but, impelled by rage, they kill an
innocent person, or one whom they should not punish? They should undergo a
capital penalty, or be deported to an island, as indeed most of them are.

8. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LIV.
When anything is donated to a proconsul or a Praetor, in violation of the law
on extortion, he cannot acquire it by usucaption.
(1) The same law provides that: "Sales or leases made for a greater or a less
price than is just are for this reason void, and usucaption is prevented before
the property comes into the hands of him who had it, or his heir."

9. Papinianus, Opinions, Book XV.
Those who, in consideration of money paid to them, relinquish a public
employment, are criminally prosecuted for extortion.

* 48.XII. CONCERNING THE JULIAN LAW ON PROVISIONS.

1. Marcianus, Institutes, Book II.
A criminal action can be brought by a slave against his master, if the former
alleges that his master has committed fraud with reference to provisions
belonging to the public.
2. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book IX.
By the Julian Law relating to Provisions a penalty is prescribed against him
who commits any act, or forms any association by means of which the price of
provisions may be increased.
(1) It is provided by the saine law that no one shall detain a ship or a
sailor, or maliciously commit any act by which delay may be caused.
(2) The penalty prescribed is a fine of twenty aurei.
3. Papirius Justus, On the Constitutions, Book I.
The Emperors Antoninus and Verus stated in a Rescript: "It is anything but just
for decurions to sell grain to their fellow citizens at a lower price than the
supply of provisions requires."
(1) They likewise asserted that the magistrates of any city had no right to fix
the price of grain which was imported.
(2) They also stated the following in a Rescript: "Although it is not customary
for women to give this kind of information, still, if you promise that you can
furnish information which will be to the benefit of the Department of
Subsistence, you can communicate it to the prefect of that branch of the public
service."

* 48.XIII. CONCERNING THE JULIAN LAW RELATING TO PECULATION, SACRILEGE, AND BALANCES.

1. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLIV.
It is provided by the Julian Law on Peculation, that: "No one shall intercept,
or appropriate for his own use, or do anything, by means of which another can
remove, intercept, or employ for his own benefit, any money derived from
sacred, religious, or public sources, unless he is authorized to do so by law;
and no one shall add to, or mix anything with, gold, silver, or copper
belonging to the government; or knowingly and fraudulently commit any act by
means of which anything may be added to, or mixed with, the same, through which
its value may be diminished."
2. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book XI.
He is liable under the Julian Law relating to Balances who retains any public
money destined for a certain use, and does not employ it for that purpose.
3. Ulpianus, On Adultery, Book I.
The penalty for peculation originally was the interdiction of water and fire,
for which, at present, deportation has been substituted. Moreover, anyone who
is placed in this position loses not only all his former rights but also his
property.
4. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIV.
He is liable under the Julian Law relating to Peculation who removes or
appropriates any money destined for sacred or religious purposes.
(1) He is also liable to the penalty for peculation who abstracts anything
which has been donated to Immortal God.
(2) Moreover, it is provided by the Imperial Mandates relating to sacrilege
that the Governors of provinces shall search for all sacrilegious persons,
robbers, and kidnappers, and punish them according
to the gravity of their offences; and it is provided by the Imperial
Constitutions that sacrilege shall be punished arbitrarily, by a penalty
proportioned to the crime.
(3) He is liable under the Julian Law relating to Balances who retains in his
hands any public money received from leases or purchases, the disposal of
provisions or of anything else.
(4) Moreover, he who has received public money destined for any purpose, and
retains it, and does not employ it for that purpose, is liable under this law.
(5) Anyone convicted under this law is punishable by a fine of a third more
than what he owes.
(6) A place does not become religious in which a treasure is found; for, even
though it may be found in a tomb, it is not seized as being religious. For what
anyone is forbidden to inter cannot render a place religious, and money cannot
be buried, as is provided by the Imperial Mandates,
(7) But when any public property is stolen, it is provided by the Constitutions
of the Emperors Trajan and Hadrian that the crime of peculation is committed.
This is the present practice.
5. The Same, Rides, Book IV.
The Divine Severus and Antoninus stated in a Rescript addressed to Cassius
Festus that if the property of private individuals deposited in a temple should
be stolen, an action for theft, and not one for sacrilege should be brought.
6. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book VII.
The Proconsul should inflict the penalty for sacrilege either with greater or
less severity or clemency, in accordance with the rank and condition of the
culprit, taking into consideration the time, as well as his or her age and sex.
I know that several magistrates have sentenced persons guilty of sacrilege to
be thrown to wild beasts, others to be burned alive, and still others to be
hanged on a gallows. The penalty, however, should be regulated by having those
thrown to wild beasts who, with an armed band, have broken into a temple, and
carried away the gifts of the gods by night; but where a person takes something
of trifling value from a temple, he should be punished by being sentenced to
the mines, or if he was born in a superior position, he should be deported to
an island.
(1) Those who make public money, or stamp it with a public die, and manufacture
it for themselves outside of the mint, or steal it after it has been stamped,
are not considered to have counterfeited it, but as having committed a theft of
the common coin which resembles the crime of peculation.
(2) If anyone should steal any gold or silver belonging to the State, he shall,
according to an Edict of the Divine Pius, be punished with exile, or sentenced
to the mines according to his rank. Anyone who lends his stamp to a thief is
considered to have been convicted- of manifest theft, and becomes infamous. He
who has unlawfully extracted gold from a mine, and melted it, is condemned to
quadruple damages.
7. Venuleius Saturninus, Public Prosecutions, Book II.The crime of peculation
cannot be prosecuted after the lapse of five years.
8. The Same, Public Prosecutions, Book HI.
Anyone who removes the brazen tablet of the law containing the boundaries of
fields or anything else, or changes it in any way, is liable under the Julian
Law relating to Peculation.
(1) He who erases anything from the public registers, or inserts anything
therein, is liable under this law.
9. Paulus, On Public Prosecutions.
Persons convicted of sacrilege shall be punished with death.
(1) Persons guilty of sacrilege are such as purloin sacred articles belonging
to the public. Those who appropriate sacred property belonging to persons, or
chapels which are unguarded, deserve a more severe penalty than thieves, and a
less severe one than sacrilegious persons. Therefore, careful consideration
should be given to what is sacred, and to any acts which may be included in the
crime of sacrilege.
(2) Labeo, in the Thirty-eighth Book of his Last Works, defines peculation to
be the theft of public or sacred money, not made by him at whose risk it was at
the time; and therefore the guardian of a temple, to whom property of this kind
has been entrusted, does not commit peculation.
(3) In the same chapter, lower down, he says that not only the appropriation of
public money, but also that of money belonging to private individuals,
constitutes the offence of peculation, when anyone receives funds due to the
Treasury pretending that he is the creditor of the latter; even though he may
have taken, as his own, money belonging to a private person.
(4) He, also, who receives money for the purpose of transportation, or anyone
else who assumes responsibility for money, does not commit peculation.
(5) The Senate ordered that those should be liable under the law against
peculation who, without the order of the official in charge, permitted the
examination and copying of public registers.
(6) He, also, who retains any public money destined for a certain use and does
not employ it for that purpose is liable under this law; so Labeo says in the
Thirty-eighth Book of his Last Works. Anyone who, departing from the province
where he has held office, renders an account to the Treasury of the money
remaining in his hands, and holds it, is not liable to an action to recover the
balance, for the reason that he is a private individual indebted to the
Treasury, and therefore should be classed among debtors; and he who is invested
with authority can collect it from him, either by seizing his property,
arresting him, or imposing a fine; but the Julian Law orders that, after the
lapse of a year, this money shall be classed as a balance due.
10. Marcianus, Public Prosecutions, Book I.
He is liable under this law who enters upon the public registers a smaller
amount than the proceeds of a sale or a lease, or who commits any other offence
of this kind.
(1) The Divine Severus and Antoninus, having ascertained that a young man of
very illustrious lineage had a small chest placed in a temple, and, after the
temple was closed, emerged out of the chest and stole many things belonging to
the temple, and afterwards again shut himself up in the chest, deported him to
an island, after his conviction.
11. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXVIII.
Anyone who perforates the wall of a temple, or steals anything by this means,
is liable to the action for peculation.
(1) Whoever enters a sanctuary by day or by night, and removes any sacred
property therefrom, shall be blinded; and anyone who removes anything outside
the sanctuary or any other part of the temple shall be scourged, have his head
shaved and be sent into exile.
12. Marcellus, Digest, Book XXV.
I am by no means guilty of peculation if I collect money from someone who is
indebted to me as well as to the Treasury; for the money which I receive from
the debtor of the Treasury is not misappropriated by me, because he still
remains indebted to the Treasury.
13. Modestinus, On Punishments, Book II.
He who steals booty taken from the enemy is liable under the law relating to
peculation, and shall be sentenced to pay quadruple damages.
14. Papinianus, Questions, Book XXXVI.
Public prosecutions for peculation, as well as those for appropriating
balances, and for extortion, can also be brought against an heir; and this is
not unreasonable, as the principle question involved has reference to the
stolen money.

* 48.XIV. CONCERNING THE JULIAN LAW.WlTH REFERENCE TO THE UNLAWFUL SEEKING OP OFFICE.

1. Modestinus, On Punishments, Book II.
This law is not at present in force at Rome, because the creation of
magistrates is part of the duty of the Emperor, and does not depend upon the
favor of the people.
(1) If anyone in a municipality should violate this law by soliciting either a
political or a sacerdotal office, he is by a Decree of the Senate punished by a
fine of a hundred aurei,and infamy.
(2) If anyone condemned under this law convicts another, he shall be entirely
restored to his rights, but his money will not be returned.
(3) Likewise, he who establishes a new tax is liable to this penalty by the
Decree of the Senate.
(4) If either an accused person, or an accuser, enters the house of his judge,
he commits an unlawful act according to the Julian Law relating to Judges; that
is to say, he will be ordered to pay a hundred aureito the Treasury.1

* 48.XV. CONCERNING THE FAVIAN LAW WITH REFERENCE TO KIDNAPPERS.

1. Ulpianus, Rules, Book I.
Anyone who knowingly purchases a freeman incurs liability for a capital offence
under the Favian Law against kidnapping; and the vendor also can be prosecuted
under it if he sold the man being aware that he was free.

2. The Same, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book IX.
It must be remembered that the Favian Law does not relate to those who, having
in their hands absent slaves, sell them; for it is one thing to be absent, and
another to be in flight.
(1) Again, it does not apply to a person who has ordered his fugitive slave to
be pursued and sold; for he did not sell a fugitive slave.
(2) It can further be said that if anyone orders Titius to arrest a fugitive
slave, and, if he should do so, to hold him as purchased, the Decree of the
Senate does not apply. Masters who have sold their slaves when in flight are
also liable under this Decree of the Senate.
1 Ambitus,the corrupt solicitation of office, generally by means of the bribery
of voters, was a proceeding with which the "practical politicians" of our day
are thoroughly familiar. The term originally signified the "going about" of the
candidate, and his diligent, if not importunate canvass for popular support, to
enable him to secure the coveted place either in the sacerdotal or political
branch of the government, by the suffrages of the rabble. The means available
for this purpose were much more complicated, and probably more expensive, than
those employed by office-seekers under the present elective system. The
candidate, so called from the white robe which he wore in public to render him
conspicuous, was accompanied by a retinue of attendants who assisted him with
their advice and exertions. At his elbow walked the nomenclator, who knew the
rank and name of every citizen, and whispered them in time for a cordial
greeting to be extended when an individual of influence or a group of voters
approached. In his train followed the interpreswho negotiated for the votes;
the sequester,or custodian of the money to be paid for them; the divisor,who
distributed it after it had been earned; and the relatives, friends, clients,
and dependents of the aspirant for office, each of whom was presumed to do his
share of the electioneering. Every act of the modern demagogue was
systematically and assiduously practiced. The candidate shook hands with every
prospective constituent. He lavished flattery, and terms of respect and
endearment upon all supposed to be susceptible to such advances. In addition to
bribery by the
3. Marcianus, Public Prosecutions, Book I.
A bona fidepossessor is not liable to the penalty imposed by the Favian Law for
having wrongfully withheld a slave; that is to say, if he did not know that the
slave belonged to another, or if he thought that he acted with the consent of
his master. And the law itself is framed in this way with reference to a bona
fidepossessor, for there is added, "If he did this knowingly and fraudulently."
It has very frequently been decided by the Emperors Severus and Antoninus that
bona fidepossessors are not liable under this law.
(1) It should not be forgotten that, as under the Aquilian Law, if the person
on whose account the Favian Law was violated should die, the accusation and the
penalty prescribed by the Favian Law will continue to exist, as the Divine
Severus and Antoninus stated in a Rescript.
4. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XXII.
He is liable under the Favian Law who either donates, or gives by way of dowry,
a man whom he knows to be free; likewise, anyone who, knowing a man to be free,
accepts him under such circumstances, should be included in the same class to
which a vendor and a purchaser belong.
The same rule will apply where property is given in exchange for such a man.
5. Modestinus, Opinions, Book XVII.
Gave it as his opinion that he who is alleged to have received a fugitive slave
belonging to another, and to have concealed him, even if he asserts that he is
his property, can, by no means, escape the penalty, if he is proved to be
guilty.
6. Callistratus, On Judicial Inquiries, Book VI.He does not forthwith become a
kidnapper who is guilty of theft, on the ground of withholding slaves belonging
to another, for the Di-
use of money, magnificent and costly banquets, theatre parties, circus and
gladiatorial exhibitions were given to secure the suffrages of the Roman mob.
Largitio,or the corrupt expenditure of money to obtain political promotion
succeeded to, and became synonymous with ambitus,which originally did not
convey the implication of bribery. Many laws were passed for the purpose of
correcting this abuse, which became widespread during the Republic, but none of
them proved effective. The first one, enacted A. U. C. 321, prohibited the use
of the toga Candida.The next, the Lex Cornelia,adopted seventy years later,
rendered a candidate who had been convicted of bribery incapable of holding a
magisterial office for ten years. Intimidation at the polling places, by the
employment of gladiators and armed men, which seems to have been a frequent and
serious cause of complaint, was provided against by the Lex Maria.Other laws
were, from time to time, promulgated to prevent the giving of feasts and public
exhibitions of any kind with a view to obtaining the support of voters.
Occasion for the enforcement of these enactments ceased with the accession of
Tiberius to the Imperial throne, when offices became no longer elective at
Rome, but were distributed at the caprice of the sovereign. The evil still
continued to flourish in the municipalities of the Empire, however, as is
indicated by the heavy penalty mentioned in the text.---ED.
vine Hadrian stated in a Rescript: "He who has solicited or appropriated the
slaves of another gives rise to the question whether he is, or is not liable
for the crime of kidnapping, of which he is accused; and therefore it is not
necessary to consult me on this point. The judge, however, in a case of this
kind must decide what he knows to be perfectly true, for it is evident that he
must be aware that a person can be guilty of the crime of theft with reference
to slaves taken from others, and not necessarily for that reason, be considered
guilty of kidnapping."
(1) The same Emperor stated in a Rescript with reference to the same matter:
"Where one or more fugitive slaves is found in the possession of anyone who has
hired their services in consideration of their maintenance, and the said slaves
had previously performed labor for others, no one can properly say that the
above-mentioned' person has appropriated them."
(2) It is provided by the Favian Law that: "A freeman who conceals one who is
freeborn or a freedman, against his will; or has kept him in fetters, and has
knowingly and fraudulently purchased him; or has been associated with anyone in
a transaction of this kind; or has persuaded the male or female slave of
another to run away from his or her master or mistress; or has concealed such a
slave without the knowledge or consent of his or her master or mistress; or has
kept him or her chained; or knowingly and fraudulently has purchased the slave,
or has been implicated in any of these crimes, shall suffer the penalty of the
law."
7. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book VI.
The pecuniary penalty prescribed by the Favian Law has now ceased to be
imposed; for those who are convicted of this crime are punished in proportion
to its gravity, and are usually sentenced to the mines.1
1 The crime of kidnapping, otherwise known as abduction, especially when
directed against children, has justly aroused the indignation of legislators in
all ages, and was, formerly, capitally punished. "If a man steal a man's son,
who is a minor, he shall be put to death." (The Code of Hammurabi, 14.) "He
that stealeth a man, and selleth him, or if he be found in his hand, he shall
surely be put to death." (Exodus XXI, 16.)
Anglo-Saxon Law which, in general, favored the pecuniary composition of
offences, was more lenient, and the accused could purge himself by oath. "If a
freeman steal a man: if the man return and denounce him before the stermelda
(sheriff) : let him clear himself, if he be able, and let him have the number
of free sevda-men(compurgators) and one with himself in the oath, each at the
town to which he belongs: if he be unable, let him pay according to his
substance." (Ancient Laws and Institutes of England, The Laws of Hlothhsere and
Eadric, 5.)
Kidnapping, at Common Law, was a misdemeanor, punishable by fine and
imprisonment. It was made felony without benefit of clergy by Stat. 43, Eliz.,
c. 13, where anyone was forcibly seized and carried out of the four northern
counties of England, or imprisoned therein to extort a ransom; a measure
evidently intended to prevent persons from being taken over the border into
Scotland against their will, or to put a check upon the incursions of the
Scotch themselves.
It was the English rule that if a child was stolen for its clothes, and they
were not removed, no felony was committed. The greater part of the English
statute on

* 48.XVI. CONCERNING THE TURPILLIAN DECREE OF THE SENATE AND THE DISMISSAL OF CHARGES.
1. Marcianus, On the Turpillian Decree of the Senate.
The recklessness of accusers is detected in three ways, and is punished by
three penalties; for they either calumniate, prevaricate, or withdraw.
(1) To calumniate is to bring false accusations. To prevaricate is to conceal
true crimes. To withdraw is to entirely abandon a charge.
(2) Punishment is inflicted upon calumniators by the Remmian Law.
(3) He who does not prove what he alleges is not immediately considered to be a
calumniator, for the investigation of the offence is left to the judge, having
jurisdiction of the case; who, if the defendant is acquitted, begins to inquire
into the intention of the accuser, and why he was induced to bring the
accusation; and if he finds this was due to a just mistake, he must discharge
him. If, however, he should ascertain that he evidently has been guilty of
calumny, he must inflict upon him the penalty of the law.
(4) The decision of either of these points is disclosed by the words of the
judgment. For if it is as follows, "You have not proved your allegations," he
spares the defendant; but ff he says, "You are guilty of calumny," he condemns
him; and even though he may add nothing with reference to the penalty, still
the power of the law will be enforced
the subject relates to the forcible abduction of women for the purpose of
debauchery or marriage. The kidnapping of a child under fourteen years of age
is a felony, rendering the offender liable to a maximum punishment of seven
years penal servitude. The Statute is silent so far as children over that age
are concerned, hence their kidnappers are only guilty of a misdemeanor under
the Common Law. (VideArchbold, Criminal Procedure, Vol. II, Page 135. Stephen,
A Digest of the Criminal Law V, XXX, Art. 263.)
In the United States, theft of the children of wealthy persons for ransom has,
in recent years, become so common that the severest penalties have everywhere
been denounced against its perpetrators. It is not necessary for violence to be
employed, or the child to be removed to a foreign country. False imprisonment,
which involves any degree of forcible detention, is essential to constitute the
offence. This may be effected by causing fear through menaces, without the
actual exertion of physical compulsion. (VideArchbold, Criminal Procedure,
Ibid.,Wharton, A Treatise on Criminal Law, Secs. 776, 777.)
The Spanish Code provides that the kidnapper of a child under seven years shall
be imprisoned for from twelve years and a day, to twenty years. "La sustrac-
cion de un menor de siete anos sera castigada con la pena de cadena temporal."
(Codigo Penal de Espana,Art. 498.)
In Italy, the restraint by violence of the liberty of a minor under sixteen is
punishable by imprisonment for not more than one year. (Codice Penale del Regna
d'ltalia,Art. 148.)
French law prescribes a maximum punishment of ten years penal servitude upon
all participants in the crime, without distinction.
"Quiconque aura, par frauds ou violence, enleve ou fait enlever des mineurs, ou
les aura entraines, detournes ou de-places, ou. les aura fait entrainer,
detourner ou deplacer des lieux ou Us etaient mis par ceux a I'autorite ou a la
direction desquels
against him. For (as Papinianus held), the question of fact depends upon the
discretion of the court, but the infliction of the punishment is not left to
his will, but is reserved for the authority of the law.
(5) It may be asked, if the judge should make the following statement, "Lucius
Titius appears to have brought a rash accusation," should he be considered to
have pronounced him a calumniator? Papinianus says that rashness affords a
ground for pardon, and that unrestrained anger lacks the vice of calumny, and
on this account no penalty need be incurred.
(6) We have shown him to be a prevaricator who is in collusion with the
defendant, and who relinquishes his post as accuser, in order that he may
conceal his evidence, and permit the false excuses of the defendant to be
advanced.
(7) If, however, anyone desists from prosecuting the accusation without having
it dismissed, he is punished.
(8) The dismissal of a case is usually asked for, and granted by the Governors
of provinces. The application for it is made to the magistrate while presiding
in court, and not elsewhere; and if he is present he cannot leave the
investigation to another.
(9) If one person has accused the same individual of several offences, he
should apply for the dismissal of each of them, otherwise he will suffer the
penalty prescribed by the Decree of the Senate for each offence omitted.
(10) He who brings an accusation which can be barred by prescription, as, for
instance, that of adultery, when five continuous years have elapsed since its
commission by the man, or after six available months from the day of the
divorce, in case of the woman; can there
 Us etaient soumis ou confies, subira la peine de la reclusion.(Code Penal de
France, Arts. 21, 354.)
The Imperial Criminal Code of Germany fixes the penalty for the abduction of a
minor at imprisonment at hard labor for a term not exceeding ten years. Where
mitigating circumstances exist, a fine of not more than three thousand marks
may be imposed. If the child is stolen to be used in begging, the penalty is
increased. "Wer eine minderjdhrige Person durch List, Drohung oder Gewalt ihren
Eltern, ihrem Vormund oder ihrem Pfleger entsiet, wird mit Gefdngniss bestraft.
"Sind mildernde Umstande vorhanden, so kann auf Geldstrafe bis zu dreitau-send
Mark erkannt werden." (Strafgesetzbuch fur das Deutsche Reich,Art. 285.)
Austria punishes this offence when a grown person does not consent, or a child
is under fourteen, with imprisonment at hard labor for from five to ten years.
(Allgemeines Strafgesetz,Art. 97.) '
The penalty for kidnapping a minor of any age, in Holland, cannot exceed
imprisonment for six years. (Wetboek van Strafrecht,Art. 279.)
Restraint of the liberty of a minor under fifteen years of age, in Denmark,
subjects the offender to imprisonment for from two months to eight years.
(Almindelig borgerlig Straffelov,Sec. 213.)
In Sweden, the kidnapper of a child under fifteen is liable to penal servitude
for from two to six years. (Sveriges Hikes Lag,15 Kap,Sec. 6.)
The abduction by force or otherwise, of anyone under legal age, is punished by
the Belgian Code with a fine of from fifty to five hundred francs, and
confinement in prison for a term of one to five years. "Sera puni d'un
emprisonnement d'un an a cinq ans, et d'une amende de50 francs a500 francs,
celui qui, par violence ruse ou menace aura enleve ou fait enlever des
mineurs." (Code des Lois Petioles Beiges,Art. 368.)---ED.
be any doubt whatever that, if he desists, he should be punished under this
Decree of the Senate? A difficulty arises here for the reason that this
accusation almost becomes of no effect when a period of time, or some defect in
the person exists, which will render the defendant secure from fear and danger.
On the other hand, when an accusation has once been brought, it cannot be
dismissed at the wish of the accuser, but this must be done by the authority of
the magistrate having cognizance of the case, and he is considered to be more
worthy of odium who rashly brings such a disgraceful charge.
Therefore, the better opinion is that he, also, of whom we spoke, should come
within the terms of the Decree of the Senate. Papinianus, however, gives it as
his opinion that if a woman who was not competent to bring an accusation of
forgery, because she was not prosecuting an injury inflicted upon herself, or
her family, should desist, she ought not be punished under the Turpillian
Decree of the Senate. Would he have given the same opinion in other cases? For
what difference does it make if an accusation is not permitted to be brought on
account of the weakness of sex; the baseness of one's condition; or the lapse
of time ? There is much more reason that persons should be exempt from
punishment under such circumstances, because the accusation of the woman can at
least be effective on account of her own injury, while the accusation of the
others is nothing but the sound of a voice. However, the same authority has
stated elsewhere that no one can accuse both persons, that is the man and the
woman, of adultery at the same time; and still, if he did accuse both of them
simultaneously, he should ask for the dismissal of the case against both, in
order to avoid becoming liable under this Decree of the Senate.
Moreover, what difference will it make if the accusation should prove to be
void, for the reasons above mentioned, or if it could not stand on account of
the number accused? Or if there is some distinction to be made where anyone has
full power to bring an accusation, but is prevented from doing so because of
the joinder of the two individuals; or he is not qualified to accuse them
according to the strict construction of the law?
Hence it is reasonable to hold that all persons (with the exception of women
and minors), when they do not ask for a dismissal of the case, will come within
the scope of this Decree of the Senate.
(11) The accusation of a suspected guardian can only be heard in open court,
and no one but the Governor of the province can render a decision in such a
case; and, nevertheless, anyone who desists from prosecution will not incur the
penalty of the Decree of the Senate.
(12) Likewise, where anyone is accused of having incurred the penalty of the
Turpillian Decree of the Senate, it is the duty of the Governor of the province
to take cognizance of the matter; and the penalty of the Decree of the Senate
will not be enforced against the party who abandons the charge, for he who says
that someone has incurred the penalty of this Decree of the Senate is not an
accuser.
(13) He comes within the terms of this decree who provides an accuser, or
instigates, directs, or induces anyone to bring a capital accusation, by
furnishing evidence, and by formulating charges. This is reasonable, for by
failing to prove the accusation which he was instrumental in having brought,
and by attempting to free himself from the danger of calumny by abandoning the
case, he should certainly be subjected to punishment for those offences; unless
the accuser, who had been suborned, can prove the crime which he undertook to
establish. Nor does it make any difference whether he brought the charge
himself, or directed it to be brought by another.
Papinianus gave it as his opinion that if it was true that anyone had used
means of this kind for the bringing of an accusation, he should be punished,
not according to the letter, but according to the spirit of the law; for the
accuser who took the place of the person who employed him is liable under the
same Decree of the Senate; that is to say, he is punished for that alone which
he did as the agent of another, who himself was afraid to act.
(14) A defendant who had been convicted, appealed, and his accuser afterwards
desisted; did he come within the terms of the Decree of the Senate? He seems to
have very nearly done so, because by the remedy of the appeal the decision of
conviction was extinguished.
2. Paulus, On the Penalties of All Laws.
Anyone who desists from prosecuting a crime is prevented from subsequently
bringing an accusation.
3. The Same, Sentences, Book I.
And even in the cases of accusation for private and ordinary breaches of the
law, all calumniators are arbitrarily punished in proportion to the gravity of
the offences committed.
4. Papinianus, Opinions, Book XV.
A woman who institutes a prosecution for forgery, as an injury to herself, and,
having desisted, abandons it, is not considered to have incurred the penalty of
the Turpillian Decree of the Senate.
(1) After a case has been dismissed, the same charge cannot again be brought by
the same accuser against the same defendant.
5. Paulus, Opinions, Book II.
Where a man presented a petition to the Emperor and threatened to bring an
accusation for forgery, but did not do so, the question arose whether he was
liable to the penalty imposed by the Turpillian Decree of the Senate? Paulus
answered that the party in question was not included in the terms of the
Turpillian Decree of the Senate.
6. The Same, Sentences, Book I.
He has desisted from the accusation who has spoken with his adversary with
reference to the disposal of the criminal charge which he had attempted to
prosecute.
(1) He intentionally abandons an accusation who renounces the desire and
intention of bringing it.
(2) He is held to have desisted, who does not prosecute the defendant within
the time prescribed by the Governor to prove the charge.
(3) Those who serve notice in writing of their intention to prosecute are
ordered to substantiate their allegations by the production of the notices.
(4) Those are punished for false accusations who, for the purpose of injuring
another, are alleged to have searched for, written, or produced in court any
book or other evidence to his prejudice.

7. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book Vill.
If anyone should wish to revive a criminal accusation after it has been
publicly dismissed, he can do so with the same right which he had when he first
brought it; for prescriptions cannot legally be pleaded against him which were
not pleaded before the discharge of the defendants.
This the Divine Hadrian stated in a Rescript.
(1) Where anyone brings an accusation for stellionatus,or for the crime of
plundering an estate, and then desists, he will not be subjected to the penalty
of the Turpillian Decree of the Senate, even if theft or injury is involved,
but his fault will be punished by the judge.
8. Papinianus, On Adultery, Book II.
The dismissal of a criminal case is either made publicly on account of some
memorable occasion, or because of some public rejoicing,
9. Macer, Public Prosecutions, Book II.
Or by reason of the fortunate result of some transaction,
10. Papinianus, On Adultery, Book II.
Or privately, at the request of the accuser. There is a third kind of dismissal
made in accordance with law, that is, when the accuser dies, or is prevented by
some good reason from bringing the accusation.
(1) When a dismissal is made in accordance with a public decree, the husband,
in bringing the charge a second time, will not forfeit any of his rights.
(2) The Divine Hadrian stated that the thirty days prescribed for reviving an
accusation should be understood to be available days, that is to say they
should be computed from the date on which the festivals terminated. The Senate
decreed that these days began at the time when anyone could resume the
prosecution of the defendant. This time to revive the case does not begin to
run except where the accuser can institute proceedings.

11. The Same, On Adultery.
The question was asked whether those who had been excluded from bringing an
accusation by lapse of time come within the scope of the Turpillian Decree of
the Senate. The answer was that there is no doubt that persons who are
prevented by prescription from bringing a charge of adultery can be punished
for calumny.

12. Ulpianus, On Adultery, Book II.
Where a public dismissal of a criminal case has occurred under the Decree of
the Senate, as ordinarily happens; or on account of some public rejoicing; or
to honor the Imperial House; or for some reason for. which the Senate decreed
that the defendants should be discharged, and the accuser did not renew the
accusation within the prescribed time, it must be said that the Turpillian
Decree of the Senate does not apply, for he is not held to desist who does not
accuse a person that is exempt from criminal liability. He, however, becomes
exempt from prosecution by the discharge of the defendants.

13. Paulus, On Adultery, Book III.
We understand a person to have desisted who has entirely abandoned the
intention of prosecuting, and not he who has only postponed the accusation.
Anyone who, by permission of the Emperor, desists from prosecuting a criminal
charge, is not liable to punishment.

14. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book VII.
The Divine Hadrian stated in a Rescript addressed to Salvius Carus, Proconsul
of Crete, that where a guardian had filed an accusation in the name of his
ward, and the latter, in whose behalf he had filed it, had died, he should not
be compelled to proceed with the accusation.

15. Macer, Public Prosecutions, Book II.
Those come within the scope of the Turpillian Decree of the Senate who
substitute accusers in their places; or who, having done so, bring the
accusation without prosecuting the defendants; or desist from the prosecution
in some other manner than by the dismissal of the case, as well as such as have
filed some written document, or have entered into some agreement for the
purpose of accusing another. It must be said that these words, "Bring the
accusation without prosecuting the defendants," are applicable to all the
persons above mentioned.
(1) The question arises whether the Decree of the Senate applies to those who,
at present, have extraordinary jurisdiction of public offences. The present
law, based upon the Imperial Constitutions, is that it does apply; hence each
penalty will be imposed in each individual case.
(2) If those who are not permitted to bring an accusation for calumny desist,
they will not be liable to the penalty of this Decree of the Senate. This has
been provided by the Constitutions.
(3) If, on account of the death of the defendant, the accuser should desist, he
cannot be held liable under this Decree of the Senate; because the prosecution
is extinguished by the death of the accused, unless the crime is such that its
prosecution can be continued against the heirs, as, for instance, that of high
treason.
The same rule applies where an accusation is brought for extortion, because
this also is not extinguished by death.
(4) Moreover, if the defendant should die after the accuser has desisted from
the prosecution, the offence of the accuser will not, for this reason, be
lessened. For if he who has once desisted should afterwards be ready to renew
the accusation, Severus and Antoninus have decreed that he shall not be heard.
(5) Those who, after having filed a written accusation, have permitted one or
two years to elapse, for the reason that they could not prosecute on account of
their various occupations as Governors, or because they were prevented by the
requirements of civil office, do not come within the terms of the Decree of the
Senate.
(6) If anyone has accused a person in the first place, and, after the case has
been dismissed, but before the defendant is again accused, a second dismissal
should occur, the thirty days should be computed, not from the first, but from
the second dismissal of the case.

16. Paulus, On Adultery.
Domitian stated in a Rescript that what is provided with reference to
festivals, and the discharge of defendants, does not apply to slaves who,
having been accused, are ordered to be placed in chains until the case is
decided.

17. Modestinus, Opinions, Book XVII.
Lucius Titius accused Seius of forgery, and before he prosecuted him, the
accusations of all defendants were dismissed by the indulgence of the Emperor.
I ask, if the prosecution should not afterwards be resumed whether the accuser
would be subject to the penalty of the Turpillian Decree of the Senate.
Herennius Modestinus answered that the discharge of defendants, granted by
public favor, does not apply to this kind of crime.

18. Papirius Justus, On the Constitutions, Book I.
The Emperors Antoninus and Verus stated in a Rescript to Julius Verus that, as
the case had been continued for a considerable time, the latter could not
obtain its dismissal against the consent of his adversaries.
(1) They also stated in a Rescript that, unless it was clearly proved that the
adversary had given his consent, dismissal should not be granted.
(2) They also stated in a Rescript that, where the dismissal of an accusation
for a capital crime had been applied for, as in a case involving a sum of
money, the prosecution might, nevertheless, be re-
newed; so that if the complainant could not prove what he alleged he should not
go unpunished.

* 48.XVII. CONCERNING THE CONVICTION OF PERSONS WHO ARE SOUGHT FOR OR ARE ABSENT.

1. Marcianus, Public Prosecutions, Book II.
The Divine Severus and Antoninus stated in a Rescript that no one who is absent
should be punished, and it is the present law that absent persons shall not be
condemned; for the rule of equity does not suffer anyone to be convicted
without being heard.
(1) If anyone is liable to severe punishment, for instance, if he may be
condemned to labor in the mines, or to a similar penalty, or to a capital one,
in this case the penalty must not be inflicted upon an absent person, but
anyone who is absent and is sought for is recorded as being present.
(2) The Governors of provinces should follow this course with reference to
defendants who are sought for, and noted as being present ; namely, they should
order them by Edicts to appear in order that those who have been mentioned as
being present should become aware of the fact. They should also write to
magistrates where the parties live, in order that, by their agency, those who
are being sought for may ascertain that they have been recorded as being
present.
(3) A year is computed from this date to enable them to purge themselves of
contempt.
(4) And even Papinianus, in the Sixteenth Book of Opinions, says that he who is
sought for, and noted as being present, must appear before the Governor of the
province within twelve months, and furnish security; and that there is no
reason to order that his property shall be confiscated to the Treasury, for if
he should die within the year, the accusation of the crime will be
extinguished, and come to an end, and the property of the party accused will be
transmitted to his successors.

2. Macer, On Public Prosecutions, Book II.
The term of a year is fixed for the purpose of seizing the property of anyone
who is sought for and noted as being present.
(1) If, however, the Treasury does not seize his property for twenty years, it
will be barred from doing so subsequently, if prescription should be pleaded
either by the defendant himself, or by his heirs.

3. Marcianus, On Public Prosecutions, Book II.
Any claim made by the Treasury is prescribed by a silence of twenty years, when
there is no other prescription, as was established by the Divine Emperors.
4. Macer, On Public Prosecutions, Book II.
The year is computed from the time when the notification was publicly made,
either by means of an Edict or by letters sent to the magistrate.
(1) Therefore, the term of twenty years is reckoned for the Treasury, from the
moment when the notice was published.
(2) In a word, it should be remembered that he who is sought for and notified
is not barred from undertaking his defence by any prescription of time.
5. Modestinus, Pandects, Book XII.
It is provided by the Imperial Mandates that the property of persons who are
sought for shall be sealed up during the year, and if they return, and offer
proper excuses, they shall have it restored to them. If, however, they do not
answer, and no one appears to defend them, after a year has elapsed, their
property shall be confiscated to the Treasury.
(1) And, during the intermediate year, any movable property belonging to them
may be sold, in order to prevent it being spoiled by delay, or destroyed, and
the proceeds thereof shall be deposited; as authorized by the Divine Severus
and Antoninus.
(2) The Divine Trajan stated in a Rescript that crops also are considered
movable property.
(3) Care, however, should be taken that the fugitive shall, in the meantime, be
paid nothing by his debtors, lest by this means his flight may be aided.

* 48.XVIII. CONCERNING TORTURE.

1. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book Vill.
It is customary for torture to be applied for the purpose of detecting crime.
Let us see when, and to what extent, this should be done. A beginning ought not
to be made by the actual infliction of the question, and the Divine Augustus
decided that confidence should not unreservedly be placed in torture.
(1) This is also contained in a letter of the Divine Hadrian addressed to
Sennius Sabinus. The terms of the Rescript are as follows: "Slaves are to be
subjected to torture only when the accused is suspected, and proof is so far
obtained by other evidence that the confession of the slaves alone seems to be
lacking."
(2) The Divine Hadrian also stated the same thing in a Rescript to Claudius
Quartinus, and in this Rescript he decided that a beginning should be made with
the person who was most suspected, and from whom the judge believed that the
truth could most easily be ascertained.
(3) Those whom the accuser produces from his own house should not be tortured,
for it is not easy to believe that a substitution has
been made for one whom both parents consider their dear daughter; as is stated
in a Rescript of the Divine Brothers addressed to Lucius Tiberianus.
(4) They also stated in a Rescript to Cornelius Proculus, that confidence
should not be reposed in the torture of a single slave, but that the case
should be investigated after the evidence has been given.
(5) The Divine Antoninus and the Divine Hadrian stated in a Rescript to Sennius
Sabinus that where it was alleged that slaves, in company with their master,
had carried away gold and silver, they should not be interrogated against their
master, and not even anything which they may have said when not un'der torture
will prejudice him.
(6) The Divine Brothers stated in a Rescript addressed to Lelianus Longinus
that torture should not be applied to a slave belonging to the heirs, to obtain
information with reference to the estate, even though it was suspected that the
heir had obtained the ownership of the property by means of a fictitious sale.
(7) It has frequently been stated in Rescripts that a slave belonging to a
municipality can be tortured when citizens are accused, because he is not their
slave, but the slave of the community. The same thing should be stated with
reference to the slaves of other corporations, for a slave is not considered to
belong to several masters, but to the corporate body.
(8) When a slave is serving me in good faith, even though I do not have the
ownership of him, it may be said that he can not be tortured to obtain evidence
against me.
The same rule applies to a freeman who is serving in good faith as a slave.
(9) It has also been established that a freedman cannot be tortured in a case
where his patron is accused of a capital crime.
(10) Our Emperor, together with his Divine Father, stated in a Rescript that
one brother could not be put to the question on account of another; and added
as the reason that he should not be tortured to obtain evidence to implicate
one against whom he could not be compelled to testify, if he was unwilling to
do so.
(11) The Divine Trajan stated in a Rescript to Servius Quartus that the slave
of a husband could be tortured to obtain evidence to convict his wife.
(12) He also stated in a Rescript to Mummius Lollianus that the slaves of a
person who had been convicted could be tortured to obtain evidence against him,
because they had ceased to be his.
(13) When a slave has been manumitted to prevent him from being put to torture,
the Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that he could be tortured, provided this
was not done to obtain evidence against his master.
(14) But where a slave belonged to another at the time when the investigation
was begun, but afterwards became the property of the defendant, the Divine
Brothers stated in a Rescript that he could, nevertheless, be tortured in the
case in which his master was involved.
(15) If anyone should allege that a slave has been purchased at a sale which
was void, he cannot be tortured before it has been established that the sale
was not valid. This our Emperor, with his Divine Father, stated in a Rescript.
(16) Severus also stated in a Rescript to Spicius Antigonus: "As the torture of
slaves should not be inflicted against their masters, and, if this has been
done, as it cannot be used to influence the decision of the judge about to
render it, still less should the statements of slaves against their masters be
admitted."
(17) The Divine Severus stated in a Rescript, that the confessions of accused
persons should not be considered as proofs of crime, if no other evidence is
offered to influence the sense of duty of the judge who is to decide the case.
(18) When anyone is ready to deposit the price of a slave, in order that he may
be tortured to give evidence against his master, our Emperor, with his Divine
Father, did not permit this to be done.
(19) Where slaves are tortured as accomplices in a crime, and they confess
something in court which involves their master, the Emperor Trajan stated in a
Rescript that the judge should render his decision as circumstances demand.
It is shown by this Rescript that masters can be implicated by the confessions
of their slaves, but more recent constitutions indicate that it is no longer in
force.
(20) When tributes, which no one doubts are the sinews of the republic, are
concerned, consideration of the danger which menaces with capital punishment a
slave who is the accomplice of a fraud should cause his statements to be
rejected.
(21) The magistrate in charge of the torture ought not directly to put the
interrogation whether Lucius Titius committed the homicide, but he should ask
in general terms who did it; for the other way rather seems to suggest an
answer than to ask for one. This the Divine Trajan stated in a Rescript.
(22) The Divine Hadrian stated the following in a Rescript addressed to
Calpurnius Celerianus: "Agricola, the slave of Pompeius Valens, may be
interrogated concerning himself; but if, while undergoing torture, he should
say anything more, it will be considered as proof against the defendant, and
not the fault of him who asked the question."
(23) It was declared by the Imperial Constitutions that while confidence should
not always be reposed in torture, it ought not to be rejected as absolutely
unworthy of it, as the evidence obtained is weak and dangerous, and inimical to
the truth; for most persons, either through their power of endurance, or
through the severity of the torment, so despise suffering that the truth can in
no way be extorted from them. Others are so little able to suffer that they
prefer to lie rather than to endure the question, and hence it happens that
they make confessions of different kinds, and they not only implicate
themselves, but others as well.
(24) Moreover, faith should not be placed in evidence obtained by the torture
of enemies, because they lie very readily; still, under the pretext of enmity,
its employment should not be rejected.
(25) After the case has been duly investigated, it can be decided whether
confidence is to be placed in torture, or not.
(26) When anyone has betrayed robbers, it is stated by certain rescripts that
no confidence should be placed in those who betrayed them. In others, however,
which are more specific, it is provided that the evidence should not be
entirely rejected, as is usual in similar cases; but, after proper
consideration, it should be determined whether it is entitled to credit or not.
For the majority of such persons, who fear that those who have been arrested
may mention them, are accustomed to betray the latter for the purpose of
themselves obtaining immunity, because accused persons who denounce those who
have betrayed them are not readily believed; nor should immunity
indiscriminately be granted to them as a reward for betrayals of this kind; nor
should their allegations be believed, when they say that they have been accused
by the others for having given them up, for this weak proof based on mendacity
or calumny ought not to be considered against them.
(27) If anyone voluntarily confesses a crime, faith should not always be
reposed in him; for sometimes one makes a confession through fear, or for some
other reason. An Epistle of the Divine Brothers addressed to Voconius Saxa
declares that a man who had made a confession against himself, and whose
innocence was established, must be discharged after his conviction.
The terms of the Epistle are as follows: "It is in compliance with the dictates
of prudence and humanity, my dear Saxa, that, where a slave was suspected of
having falsely confessed himself guilty of homicide, through fear of being
restored to his master, you condemned him, still persevering in his false
statement, with the intention of subjecting to torture his alleged accomplices,
whom he had also accused falsely, in order that you might render his statements
with reference to himself more certain.
"Nor was your judicious intention in vain, as it was established by the torture
that the persons referred to were not his accomplices, but that he had accused
himself falsely. You can then set aside the judgment, and order him to be
officially sold, under the condition that he never shall be returned to the
power of his master, who, having received the price, will certainly be very
willing to be rid of such a slave."
The Rescript indicates that, when a slave is condemned, if he should
subsequently be discharged from liability, he will belong to the person whose
property he was before his conviction. The Governor of the province, however,
cannot restore anyone whom he has condemned to his original condition, as he
cannot even revoke a decision in which money is involved. What then should be
done? He should have recourse to the Emperor when anyone who at first appeared
to be guilty, afterwards has his innocence established.

2. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIX.
Slaves forming part of an estate cannot be put to the torture to obtain
evidence against their masters, as long as it is uncertain to whom the property
belongs.

3. The Same, On the Edict, Book LVI.
It was established by a Constitution of Our Emperor and the Divine Severus that
a slave belonging to several owners cannot be subjected to torture against any
of them.

4. The Same, Disputations, Book III.
In a case of incest (according to the opinion of Papinianus,' which is also set
forth in a Rescript), slaves are not liable to torture, because the Julian Law
relating to Adultery does not apply.

5. Marcianus, Institutes, Book II.
Where anyone debauches a widow or a woman married to another, with whom he
could not legally have contracted matrimony, he should be deported to an
island, as the crime is a double one; incest, because, contrary to Divine Law,
he has violated a woman related to him, and has added adultery or fornication
to this offence. Finally, in a case of this kind, slaves can be tortured for
the purpose of obtaining evidence against their masters.

6. Papinianus, On Adultery, Book II.
When a father or a husband brings an accusation of adultery, and a demand is
made that the slaves of the party accused be put to the question, if an
acquittal should result, after the case has been argued, and the witnesses
produced, an estimate must be made of the value of the slaves who have died;
but if a conviction should be obtained, the surviving slaves shall be
confiscated.
(1) When the case is one involving a forged will, the slaves belonging to the
estate can be tortured.

7. Ulpianus, On Adultery, Book III.
The judges must determine the measure of torture, and therefore it should be
inflicted in such a way that the slave may be preserved either for his
acquittal, or his punishment.

8. Paulus, On Adultery, Book II.
The Edict of the Divine Augustus, which he published during the Consulate of
Vivius Avitus and Lucius Apronianus, is as follows: "I do not think that
torture should be inflicted in every instance, and upon every person; but when
capital and atrocious crimes cannot be detected and proved except by means of
the torture of slaves, I hold that it is most effective for ascertaining the
truth, and should be employed."
(1) The slave who is to be free under a condition may be subjected to torture,
because he is the slave of the heir, but he will still retain his hope of
freedom.

9. Marcianus, On Public Prosecutions, Book II.
The Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that torture could be inflicted upon
slaves in cases where money was involved, if the truth could not otherwise be
ascertained, which is also provided by other rescripts. This, however, is true
to the extent that this expedient should not be resorted to in a pecuniary
case, but only where the truth cannot be ascertained unless by the employment
of torture is it lawful to make use of it, as the Divine Severus stated in a
Rescript. Hence it is permitted to put the slaves of others to the question if
the circumstances justify it.
(1) In cases in which torture should not be inflicted upon slaves to obtain
evidence against their masters they cannot even be interrogated, and still less
can the statements of slaves against their masters be admitted.
(2) Torture should not be inflicted upon one who is deported to an island, as
the Divine Pius stated in a Rescript.
(3) Nor should it be inflicted, in a pecuniary case, upon a slave who is to be
free under a condition, unless the condition fails to be fulfilled.

10. Arcadius, Charisius, On Witnesses.
Torture should not be inflicted upon a minor under fourteen years of age, as
the Divine Pius stated in a Rescript addressed to Csecilius Jubentinus.
(1) All persons, however, without exception, shall be tortured in a case of
high treason which has reference to princes, if their testimony is necessary,
and circumstances demand it.
(2) It may be asked whether torture cannot be inflicted upon slaves belonging
to the castrense peculium of a son in order to obtain evidence against his
father. For it has been established that a father's slave should not be
tortured to obtain evidence against his son. I think that it may be properly
held that the slaves of a son should not be tortured to obtain evidence against
his father.
(3) Torture should not be applied to the extent that the accuser demands, but
as reason and moderation may dictate.
(4) The accuser should not begin proceedings with evidence derived from the
house of the defendant, when he calls as witnesses the freedmen or the slaves
of the person whom he accuses.
(5) Frequently, also, in searching for the truth, even the tone of the voice
itself, and the diligence of a keen examination afford assistance. For matters
available for the discovery of truth emerge into the light from the language of
the witness, and the composure or trepidation he displays, as well as from the
reputation which each one enjoys in his own community.
(6) In questions where freedom is involved, it is not necessary to seek for the
truth by the torture of those whose status is in dispute.

11. Paulus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book II.Even if a slave should be
returned under a condition of the sale, he shall not be tortured to obtain
evidence against his master.

12. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LIV.
When anyone, to avoid being tortured, alleges that he is free, the Divine
Hadrian stated in a Rescript that he should not be put to the question before
the case brought to decide his freedom has been tried.

13. Modestinus, Rules, Book V.
It is established that a slave can be tortured after he has been appraised, or
the required stipulation has been entered into.

14. The Same, Rules, Book VIII.
A slave who is to be free under a condition, and who has been convicted of
crime, will be entitled to the privilege of expecting his liberty, so that on
account of the uncertainty of his status he will be punished as a freeman, and
not as a slave.

15. Callistratus, Judicial Inquiries, Book V.
It is not necessary to inflict torture in the case of a freeman, where his
testimony is not vacillating.
(1) In the case of a minor under fourteen years of age, the Divine Pius stated
in a Rescript to Msecilius that torture should not be inflicted to obtain
evidence against another, especially as the accusation was by no means
established by other evidence, since it did not result that the minor should be
believed, even without the application of torture; for he says that age, which
appears to protect persons against the harshness of torture, renders them also
more suspected of falsehood.
(2) He who has given security to another claiming a slave should be considered
as the master; and therefore such slaves cannot be put to torture to obtain
evidence against him. The Divine Pius stated the following in a Rescript: "You
must prove your case by other testimony, for torture should not be inflicted
upon slaves, when the possessor of an estate has given security to a claimant,
and in the meantime, is considered as the master."

16. Modestinus, On Punishments, Book III.
The Divine Brothers stated in a Rescript that torture could be repeated.
(1) The Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that one who has made a confession
implicating himself, shall not be tortured to obtain evidence against others.

17. Papinianus, Opinions, Book XVI.
Again, when a stranger brings an accusation, it has been established that
slaves can be tortured to obtain evidence against their
masters; a rule which the Divine Marcus, and afterwards the Emperor Maximus,
followed in rendering their decisions.
(1) Slaves are not tortured against their master where a charge of fornication
is made.
(2) In a case of fraudulent birth, if a person whom the other children assert
is not their brother claims the estate, torture shall be applied to slaves
belonging to the estate, for the reason that it is not employed against the
other children as masters, but in order to determine the succession of the
deceased owner. This agrees with what the Divine Hadrian stated in a Rescript,
for when a man was accused of having murdered his partner, the Emperor decreed
that a slave owned in common could be put to the question, because this
appeared to be done in behalf of his master who had been killed.
(3) I gave it as my opinion that where a slave has been sentenced to the mines,
he should not be tortured to obtain evidence against the person who had been
his master, and that it made no difference if he had confessed that he had been
the perpetrator of the crime.

18. Paulus, Sentences, Book V.
Where several persons are accused of the same offence, they should be heard in
such a way as to begin with the one who is the most timid, or appears to be of
tender age.
(1) An accused person who is overwhelmed with conclusive evidence can be
tortured a second time; especially if he has hardened his mind and body against
the torments.
(2) In a case in which nothing has been proved against the defendant, torture
should not be applied without due consideration; but the accuser should be
urged to confirm and substantiate what he has alleged.
(3) Witnesses should not be tortured for the purpose of convicting them of
falsehood, or to ascertain the truth; unless they are alleged to have been
present when the deed was committed.
(4) When a judge cannot otherwise obtain reliable information concerning a
family, he can torture the slaves belonging to the estate.
(5) No confidence should be placed in a slave who voluntarily makes charges
against his master, for the safety of masters must not be left to the
discretion of their slaves.
(6) A slave cannot be interrogated to obtain evidence against his master, by
whom he has been sold, and whom for some time he served as a slave, in
remembrance of his former ownership.
(7) A slave should not be interrogated, even if his master offers to have him
put to the torture.
(8) It is clear that every time an inquiry is made whether slaves should be
interrogated to obtain evidence against their masters, it must first be
ascertained that the latter are entitled to their ownership.
(9) A governor who is to take cognizance of a criminal accusation must publicly
appoint a day when he will hear the prisoners, for those
who are to be defended should not be oppressed by the sudden accusation of
crime; although, if at any time the defendant requests it, he should not be
refused permission to defend himself, and on this account, the day of the
hearing, whether it has been designated or not, may be postponed.
(10) Prisoners can not only be heard and convicted in court, but also
elsewhere.[1]

[1] De piano,in private, by means of an ex parteproceeding.---ED.


19. Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book'IV.
He who is entitled to freedom under the terms of a trust cannot be tortured as
a slave, unless he is accused by others who already have been subjected to
torture.

20. Paulus, Decisions, Book III.
A husband, as the heir of his wife, brought suit against Surus for money which
he alleged the deceased had deposited with him during his absence, and, in
proof of it, he produced a single witness, the son of his freedman. He demanded
before the Agent of the Treasury that a certain female slave should be put to
torture. Surus denied that he had received the money, and stated that the
testimony of one man should not be admitted; and that it was not customary to
begin proceedings with torture, even though the female slave belonged to
another. The Agent of the Treasury caused the female slave to be tortured. The
Emperor decided, on appeal, that torture had been unlawfully inflicted, and
that the testimony of one witness should not be believed, and therefore that
the appeal had been properly taken.

21. The Same, On the Punishments of Civilians.
The Divine Hadrian stated in a Rescript that no one should be condemned because
he was liable to be subjected to torture.

22. The Same, Sentences, Book I.
Those who have been arrested without having any accusers, can not be tortured,
unless well-grounded suspicion is attached to them.[2]

[2] Torture was, under no circumstances authorized by the Common Law of England,
as is stated by Coke: "There is no law to warrant tortures in this land, nor
can they be justified by any prescription being so lately brought in. And there
is no one opinion in our books, or judicial record (that we have seen and
remembered) for the maintenance of tortures and torments." (Coke, Institutes
III, II, 35.)
It was prohibited by Magna Charta. "Nullus liber homo aliquo modo destruatur,
nee super eum ibimus, nee super eum mittimus, nisi per legale judicium parium
suorum, aut per legem terrse."(Magna Charta, Chap. XXIX.)
In the fifteenth century, during the reign of Henry VI, the use of the rack was
introduced into England by the ministers of the Crown, who intended to Supplant
the jurisprudence of the realm with the rules and procedure of the Civil Law.
This inauspicious beginning was, however,- received with little favor, and,
while torture was frequently employed in cases of treason in the time of
Elizabeth, and in political as well as ordinary offences as late as the reign
of Charles I, it was always considered illegal by jurists, and so far from
being justified by either law or precedent, was deemed an unwarranted exercise
of despotic power.
The nearest approach to torture recognized by the laws of England was the peine
forte et dure,styled a "penance," which was inflicted upon a defendant accused
of felony who, when called upon to plead, stood mute. It was prescribed by the
Statute of Westminster, I 12, 3, Ed. I, as follows: "Notorious felons which
refuse lawful trial shall suffer strong and hard imprisonment." (Wingate, An
Abridgment of all the Statutes in Force and Use from the beginning of Magna
Charta, Page 242.) The recalcitrant offender was stripped of everything but a
single garment, placed on his back on the floor of his dungeon, with a heavy
mass of iron fastened to his breast. He was given but a scanty allowance of
bread and water, not together, but upon alternate days, until he was willing to
answer in court or expired. "Unico indumenta indutus & discalceatus in nuda
terra quadrantalem panem hor-deaceum tantuim pro duobus diebus habeat ad
victum, non to/men quod quolibet die eomedat, sed altero tantum, nee quod
singulis diebus bibat, sed die quo non come-derit aquam bibet tantum, & htec
dieta omnibus legem refutantibus injungatur donee petant quod prius
contempserint."(Fleta, Commentarius Juris AnglicanseI, XXXIV, 33.)
The question could be legally applied in Scotland, under the ancient practice,
when authorized by the Council or Justices, but permission to employ it was not
readily obtained.
It was the last expedient to obtain evidence, "probatio ultiena,"and cleared
the person subjected to it of all previous imputations and charges (but not of
subsequent accusations), and it could be repeated. Minors and the aged were
exempt. Even conviction did not confer immunity. If proper care was not
exercised, and the victim died, those responsible could be held for homicide.
"Torture likewise being adduced purges all former presumptions, which preceded
the Torture, if the person Tortured, deny what was objected against him; but
yet he may be put to the knowledge of an inquest, upon new presumptions."
"Even after sentence, criminals may be Tortured, for knowing who were the
complices."
"Judges are discharged only to Torture such as are under fourteen; persons very
old were not to be Tortured, for the same reason."
"These who Torture, if the person Tortured die, are punishable as murderers."
(Mackenzie, The Laws and Customes of Scotland, in Matters Criminal II, XXVII,
2,3,4,5.)
The Canon Law, while sanctioning the use of torture, prohibited its infliction
upon the clergy, who were earnestly exhorted to confess their guilt. At the
same time, singularly enough, it denounced any confession obtained by force as
utterly unworthy of credit. "Confessio vero in talibus non compulsa, sed
spontanea fieri debet, Omnis enim confessio, quee sit ex necessitate, fides non
est." (Corpus Juris Canonici,Deer. II, XV, VI.)
Of all the races of German origin, the Visigoths alone permitted the
application of torments for the purpose of extorting confessions and
implicating accomplices. Before this could be done, however, an accusation
signed by three witnesses was required to be filed, and if the accuser failed
to prove his case through the defendant refusing to acknowledge his guilt, he
was delivered to the latter as a slave, subject to any retribution which his
exasperation or outraged feelings might suggest. The
proceeding was available only where a crime of extreme gravity, such as
treason, homicide, adultery, or the theft of property worth at least fifty
solidi,had been perpetrated. Nobles, prelates, and other persons of authority
and distinction were not liable to the indignity and suffering of torture. No
one could accuse another of higher rank or power than himself. If death
resulted through the corruption or malice of the judge, the latter was given up
to the nearest relatives of the victim to serve them as a slave; and the
accuser was also surrendered to them to expiate capitally the misfortune for
which his imprudence or hatred was responsible. "Spe-ciali tamen constitutione
decernimus, ut persona inferior nobiliorem se, vel poten-tiorem inscribere non
preesumat."
"Accusator autem in potestate proximorum parentum mortui traditus, eadem mortis
pcena mulctetur, qua, ille mulctatus est, qui per eius accusationem morte dam/
natus interiit." (Forum JudicumVI, I, II.)
The introduction of torture into Europe was coincident with the revival of the
Civil Law in the thirteenth century. Condemnation of the use of ordeals by the
Lateran Council had much to do with the adoption of this terrible form of
oppression, which was destined subsequently to exert such a baleful influence
upon the intellectual progress of the human race. So severe were the agonies
which its abuses entailed, that death was the only resource left to the
unfortunate who fell into the hands of the fierce and merciless inquisitor. If
he confessed he was lost; if he refused to do so, he died upon the rack. When
delivered to the secular authority "to be punished without the shedding of
blood," he perished by fire. Few records remain of testimony obtained by the
Inquisition, a tacit but significant acknowledgment of its worthlessness, and
the insufficiency of the means employed to extort it. The proceedings of the
inquisitorial tribunals are shrouded in mystery, and even the fact that resort
was had to the question is rarely admitted. (VideLea, A History of the
Inquisition of the Middle Ages, Vol. I, Pages 421, 422, 423.)
No legal principle is more finely established than that evidence given under
duress is of no value in a court of justice. Since the absence of
considerations of either fear or favor is absolutely essential to the
ascertainment of truth, the abominable malevolence and stupidity of the
barbarous authorities, both ecclesiastical and lay, who could adopt such futile
and sanguinary methods, appear all the more remarkable when contrasted with the
equitable formalities of modern legal procedure. Fortunate, indeed, was it for
succeeding generations, that a realizing sense of justice and a more accurate
conception of the true nature of evidence removed forever from judicial
tribunals practices which have branded with infamy the age in which they were
encouraged, and left an indelible blot upon the annals of humanity.---ED.

* 48.XIX. CONCERNING PUNISHMENTS.

1. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book Vill.
In every case of crime, it has been decided that the person convicted shall not
suffer the penalty which his condition admitted at the time when judgment was
rendered against him, but that which he would have undergone if he had been
sentenced when he committed the offence.

(1) Hence, when a sla^e commits a crime, and it is alleged that he afterwards
obtained his freedom, he must suffer the penalty which he would have suffered
if he had been sentenced at the time when he perpetrated the offence.
(2) On the other hand, if his condition would be rendered worse, he must
undergo the penalty which he would have undergone if he had remained in his
former condition.
Generally speaking, it has been decided that, with reference to the laws
relating to public prosecutions or private offences of which Prefects or
Governors have extraordinary jurisdiction, poor persons, who escape pecuniary
penalties, are liable to arbitrary punishment.

2. The Same, On the Edict, Book XLVIII.
We should understand a person who has been convicted of a capital crime to be
found guilty of an offence which entails death, the loss of civil rights, or
servitude.
(1) It is established that after deportation has been substituted for the
interdiction of water and fire, the defendant does not lose his citizenship
until the Emperor has decided that he shall be deported to an island. For there
is no doubt that the Governor cannot deport him, but the Prefect of the city
has a right to do so, and he is considered to have lost his citizenship
immediately after the sentence of the Prefect has been pronounced.
(2) We understand him to have been condemned who has not appealed; if, however,
he should appeal, he is not yet considered to be convicted. But if he should be
found guilty of a capital crime by someone who had not the right to do so, the
result will be the same, for a person is only convicted whose condemnation
stands.
3. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XIV.
The execution of the penalty imposed upon a pregnant woman should be deferred
until she brings forth her child. I. indeed, am well aware of the rule that
torture must not be inflicted upon her as long as she is pregnant.1
4. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIII.
Persons who are relegated or deported to an island should avoid forbidden
places; and it is the law that one who has been relegated shall not depart from
the place to which he was assigned, otherwise he who has been relegated for a
time will be condemned to perpetual exile. He who is relegated for life is sent
to an island; he who is relegated to an island is deported; and he who is
deported to an island is subjected to the penalty of death.
1 This humane provision dates back to the very origin of the Common Law, and
has been incorporated into the jurisprudence of most civilized nations. In
England, if the plea of pregnancy was entered after conviction, a jury composed
of women was empanelled, de venire inspiciendo,and if the allegation was found
to be true, execution was suspended until parturition had occurred. "Si feme
soit arraigne de felony, nest pie pur luy adire q el est enseint, eins doit
pleder al felony, & quat el est troue culp, el pent dire que el est enseynt, &
fur ceo il serra commaunde al Marshal ou viscout de mitter la feme in vn
chambre, & a faire venir femes a trier & examiner si el soit enseynt de viue
enfant ou nyent, & si troue soit que cy, donque el demurrera donee peperit & c,
& si non, donque serra el pendus maintenaunt. Mes le quel el soyt enseynt ou
nient enseint, vncore judgement ne serra per ceo delaye, mes solement
lexecution del judgement."(Staundforde, Les Flees del CoronIII, 36.)
"Ad hoc facit lex imperatoria, preegnantes mulieres dampnari poina defertur,
nee torqueantur quamdiu prsegnantes fuerint."(Fleta, Commentarius Juris Angli-
caniI, XXXVIII, 15.)
"Si une femme condamnee a mart se declare et s'il est verifie qu'elle est
enceinte, elle ne subira la peine qu'apres sa delivrance." (Code Penal de
France,Art. 27, Code des Lois Penales Beiges,Art. II.)
By the Portuguese law, one month must elapse after delivery before the sentence
can be executed. This does not apply to misdemeanors. "Nas mulheres gravi-das
nao se executarao as penas corporses, excepto a pena de prisao correccional,
senao passado un mez depois de tefminado o estado de gravidez." (Codigo Penal
Portuguez,Art. 113.)
"Dodsstraff shall ej verkstallas d kvinna, som havande ar, utan uppskjutas till
dess hon efter barnsborden tUlfrisknat." (Sveriges Hikes Lag,2 Kap. 2.)---ED.
This is the case whether the convicted person did not go into exile within the
time that he should have done so, or whether he did not obey the other rules of
exile, for his obstinacy increases his penalty, and no one can effect the
transfer of return of an exile except the Emperor for some good reason.1
5. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book VII.
The Divine Trajan stated in a Rescript addressed to Julius Fron-tonus that
anyone who is absent should not be convicted of crime. Likewise, no one should
be convicted on suspicion; for the Divine Trajan stated in a Rescript to
Assiduus Severus: "It is better to permit the crime of a guilty person to go
unpunished than to condemn one who is innocent." Persons, however, who are
contumacious and do not obey either the notices or the edicts of Governors,
can, even though absent, be sentenced, as is customary in private offences.
Anyone can safely maintain that these things are not contradictory. What, then,
should be done? With reference to parties who are absent it is better to decide
that pecuniary penalties, or those which affect the reputation, even to the
extent of relegation, can be imposed if they, having been frequently notified,
do not appear through obstinacy; but if any more serious punishment should be
inflicted, as, for instance, hard labor in the mines, or death, it cannot be
imposed upon the parties while they are absent.
(1) It must be said that where an accuser is absent, heavier penalties are
sometimes imposed than that prescribed by the Turpillian Decree of the Senate.
(2) A distinction must be made in more serious crimes, that is whether they
have been committed intentionally, or accidentally. And, indeed, in all
offences, this distinction should either induce a penalty to be inflicted in
strict compliance with the law, or admit of moderation in this respect.
6. The Same, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book IX.
When anyone, to avoid being subjected to punishment, alleges that he has
something to communicate to the Emperor which concerns his safety, let us see
whether he should be sent to him. There are many Governors who are so timid
that, even after they have passed sentence for a crime, they suspend its
execution, and do not dare to do anything else. Others do not permit defendants
to say anything of this
1 Of the two kinds of banishment known to the Romans under the Empire,
deportation was the more severe, as it involved a forfeiture of civil rights
and was classed as a capital penalty, he upon whom it had been inflicted being
considered as dead in law. Hence he was incapable of inheriting an estate, and
his property was confiscated. The place of exile was usually one of the small,
inhospitable islands of the .SCgean, or the Mediterranean Sea, and the sentence
was for life.
Relegation was confinement to some particular locality, and did not necessarily
imply loss of liberty or of civil rights, or confiscation. It could be "for a
term of years, or indefinitely; it might involve merely exclusion from Rome or
some other city, or from a province; and, if circumstances permitted, and the
authorities were indulgent, the exile could select his residence.
kind. Others again, sometimes, but not always, send them to the Emperor, but
they inquire what it is they wish to communicate to him, and what they have to
say with reference to his safety; after which they either defer the infliction
of the penalty, or execute it; which course seems to be reasonable. Besides, in
my opinion, after the defendants once have been convicted, no attention should
be paid to them, no matter what they say. For who can entertain any doubt that
they have had recourse to this pretext for the purpose of escaping punishment ?
And there is even more reason that they should be punished for having so long
failed to mention what they boast they have to disclose concerning the safety
of the Emperor, for they should not keep such important information to
themselves for so long a time.
(1) If a Proconsul ascertains that any of his attendants, or any of those of
his deputy is a criminal, should he punish him, or reserve him for his
successor? is a question which may be asked. But there are many examples which
show that they have punished not only the slaves of their officers, and of
their subordinates, but their own as well. This, indeed, is what should be
done, in order that, having been terrified by the example, they may commit
fewer offences.
(2) Now we must enumerate the different kinds of penalties which Governors can
inflict upon various culprits. These are such as take away life, or impose
servitude, or deprive a person of citizenship, or include exile or corporeal
punishment:
7. Callistratus, On Judicial Inquiries, Book VI.
Such as castigation with rods, scourging, and blows with chains,
8. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book IX.Or condemnation with infamy,
or degradation from rank, or the prohibition of some act.
(1) Life is taken away, for instance, where anyone is sentenced to be put to
death by the sword, for the punishment must be inflicted with a sword, and not
with an ax, a dart, a club, a noose, or in any other way. Hence Governors have
not free power to grant the choice of death, and even less the right to inflict
it by means of poison. Still, the Divine Brothers stated in a Rescript that
they are permitted to select the mode of death.1
(2) Enemies, as well as deserters, are subjected to the penalty of
being burned alive.
The Codes of both France and Spain, following the Civil Law, prescribe the
penalties of deportation and relegation; although, in the latter, deportation
is given another name. Deportation in France means banishment to a fortified
post outside the continental territory of the Republic; relegation is the
restriction of residence for life to some designated colony. The Balearic, or
Canary Islands, are those indicated for the punishment of the exiled criminals
of Spain. (Code Penal de FranceI, Pages 304, 330, Codigo Penal de Espana,Art.
26.)---ED.
1 The method of inflicting capital punishment varies greatly among different
nations. In ancient times, when the Lex Talionislargely prevailed, the homicide
was deprived of life in the same manner that his victim had been. The Greeks
had many ways of disposing of a convicted criminal, decapitation, poison,
crucifixion,
(3) No one can be condemned to the penalty of being beaten to death, or to die
under rods or during torture, although most persons, when they are tortured,
lose their lives.
(4) There are penalties which deprive a person of his liberty, as where anyone
is sentenced to the mines, or to some work connected with them. There are a
great number of mines. Some provinces have them and some have not; and those
which have none send culprits who have been sentenced into the provinces which
have.
(5) By a Rescript of the Divine Severus, addressed to Fabius Cilo, the right to
sentence persons to the mines is exclusively reserved to the Prefect of the
City of Rome.
(6) The difference between those who are sentenced to the mines, and those who
are sentenced to labor in the mines, is only a matter of chains; for those who
are sentenced to the mines are oppressed with heavier chains, and those who are
sentenced to work connected with the mines wear lighter ones. The result of
this is that those who escape from labor connected with the mines are sentenced
to the mines; and those who escape from the mines themselves are punished even
more severely.
(7) Moreover, anyone sentenced to labor on the public works and escapes is
usually condemned to serve double time; but only that time should be doubled
which remained for him to serve when he escaped, and that should not be doubled
which he passed in prison after having been arrested. If he was sentenced to
serve ten years, his punishment should be made perpetual, or he should be
transferred to the labor of the mines. Where he was sentenced to serve ten
years, and immediately afterwards escaped, let us see whether his time should
be doubled, or be made perpetual, or whether he should be transferred to the
labor of the mines. The better opinion is, that he should either be
transferred, or sentenced to serve for life. For, generally speaking, it is
said that when double the time exceeds the period of ten years, the penalty
should not be limited.
(8) Women are usually sentenced to the service of those working in the mines,
for life or for a term, just as is the case with reference
beating to death with clubs, strangling, lapidation, hurling from a precipice,
and burial alive; most of which were borrowed by the Romans. Beheading was the
most ordinary method practiced by the latter; poisoning and strangling were
forbidden. Crucifixion, which was a favorite punishment with the Carthaginians,
was, at Rome, confined to slaves and the vilest criminals: "Pone crucem servo."
(Juvenal, Sat. VI, 82.) Constantine abolished it, not from motives of humanity,
but for political and religious reasons.
Death by hanging is the extreme penalty in England, and generally in the United
States, where, however, nine commonwealths execute a murderer by electrocution.
In one State, he can choose whether he shall be hanged or shot. In another he
is suffocated by means of poisonous gas, when he is presumed to be asleep. In
France the guillotine is employed; in Spain, the garrote, by means of which a
sharp point is driven into the spinal cord by the turn of a lever, which is
instantly fatal.
Decapitation is the highest degree of punishment in Germany, Belgium, Sweden,
and China; hanging in Austria and Japan.
Italy, Portugal, Denmark, and Holland have abolished the death penalty, which
is also the case in several states of the Union.---ED.
to the salt-pits. Where they are sentenced for life, they are considered penal
slaves; but if they are sentenced for a prescribed term, they retain their
civil rights.
(9) Governors usually sentence criminals to be confined in prison, or to be
kept in chains; but they should not do this, for penalties of this kind are
forbidden, as a prison should be used for the safe-keeping of men, and not for
their punishment.
(10) They are also accustomed to sentence them to chalk-pits, and sulphur-pits,
but these punishments are rather included in that of the mines.
(11) Let us see whether those who are sentenced to the amusement of hunting,
become penal slaves; for the younger ones are ordinarily subjected to this
penalty. Therefore it must be considered whether such persons become penal
slaves, or whether they retain their freedom. The better opinion is that they
also become slaves, for the only way in which they differ from others is that
they are instructed in hunting, or dancing, or in some other art, for the
purpose of acting in pantomime, and other theatrical exhibitions for the
entertainment of audiences.
(12) There is no doubt that slaves are usually sentenced to the mines, to labor
connected with the mines, or to the amusement of hunting. When this is done
they become penal slaves, and no longer belong to him whose property they were
before they were convicted. Finally, when a certain slave who was sentenced to
the mines was released from punishment through the indulgence of the sovereign,
the Emperor Antoninus very properly stated in a Rescript that, for the reason
that he having become a penal slave, and on that account having ceased to
belong to his master, he should not afterwards be restored to him.
(13) Where a slave has been sentenced to perpetual, or temporary confinement in
chains, he continues to be the property of him to whom he belonged before he
was convicted.
9. The Same, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book X.
It is not unusual for Governors to forbid persons to act as advocates,
sometimes for life, and sometimes for a certain term of years, or for the time
during which they rule the province.
(1) Anyone can also be forbidden to assist certain persons.
(2) Anyone can be forbidden to accuse another before the tribunal of a
Governor, and still he cannot be forbidden to do so before his deputy, or the
Agent of the Treasury.
(3) If, however, he is forbidden to prosecute before the deputy, 1 think that,
in consequence of this, he will not retain the power to do so before the
Governor.
(4) Sometimes a person is not forbidden to act as advocate, but to practice
law. The latter penalty is more severe than the prohibition of appearing as an
advocate, since, by means of it, a person is not permitted to transact any
legal business whatever. It is customary
to interdict in this manner students of law, advocates, notaries, and other
members of the legal profession.
(5) It is also customary to prohibit them from drawing up any instrument,
petition, or deposition whatever.
(6) It is also customary to prohibit them from stopping in places where public
documents are deposited, for instance, in the archives, or wherever such papers
are stored.
(7) It is also customary to prohibit them from formulating wills, or writing,
or sealing them.
(8) The penalty of being prohibited from conducting any public business is also
imposed; for a person of this kind can transact private business, and still be
forbidden to attend to any that is public; as occurs in cases where sentence is
pronounced to abstain from all public matters.
(9) There are also other penalties, as where anyone is ordered to abstain from
any negotiation; or from having anything to do with the contracts of those who
lease property belonging to the public; or with the public taxes.
(10) It is customary for anyone to be forbidden to transact any special matter,
or any business in general; but let us see whether he can be sentenced to
transact some business. These penalties, indeed, if anyone wishes to discuss
them in a general way, are contrary to the Civil Law, for a man cannot be
ordered, against his consent, to do something that he is unable to perform;
but, in particular instances, good reason exists for compelling him to attend
to certain negotiations. When this is the case, the sentence must be executed.
(11) The following are the penalties which are ordinarily inflicted. It must,
however, be remembered that distinctions exist between them, and that all
persons should not be subjected to the same punishment. For, in the first
place, decurions cannot be sentenced to the mines, nor to work connected with
the mines, nor to the gallows, nor to be burned alive; and if any of these
sentences should be imposed upon them, they must be released. He who pronounced
the sentence, however, cannot do this, but it ought to be referred to the
Emperor, who, by his authority, will either commute the penalty or discharge
the party in question.
(12) The parents and children of decurions also enjoy the same privilege.
(13) We should understand by the term "children," not only the sons but all the
offspring.
(14) But are only those born after the office of decurion has been obtained,
exempt from these penalties; or are all the children, even those born in a
plebeian family, excepted? is a question which should be considered. I am
inclined to believe that all are entitled to the privilege.
(15) It is clear that if the father has ceased to be a decurion, any child born
while he holds the office will enjoy the privilege of not being subjected to
these penalties; but if, after he became a plebeian
again, he should have a son, the latter, having been born a plebeian, should be
punished in this manner.
(16) The Divine Pius stated to Salvius Marcianus in a Rescript that a slave,
who is to become free under a condition, should be punished just as if he were
already free.
10. Macer, On Public Prosecutions, Book II.
The rule is observed with reference to slaves, that they shall be punished as
persons of the lowest rank, and in cases where a freeman is whipped, a slave
should be scourged, and ordered to be restored to his master; and where a
freeman, after having been whipped, is sentenced to labor upon the public
works, a slave, under the same circumstances, after having been kept in chains
for a certain period of time, and scourged, is ordered to .be restored to his
master.
Where a slave, after having undergone the punishment of chains, is ordered to
be restored to his master, but is not received by him, he shall be sold; and if
he does not find a purchaser, he shall be sentenced to labor on the public
works for life.
(1) Those who, for some cause, have been sentenced to the mines and afterwards
commit some offence, ought to be judged as having been condemned to the mines,
although they may not yet have been taken to the place where they will be
compelled to work; for they change their condition just as soon as sentence has
been passed upon them.
(2) It has been decided with reference to plebeians as well as decurions, that
where a more severe penalty than is authorized by law has been inflicted upon
anyone, he does not become infamous. Therefore, if a man has been sentenced to
labor for a specified term, or only beaten with rods, although this may have
been done in an action which implied infamy, as, for instance, one of theft, it
must be said that the accused does not become infamous, because blows with a
rod constitute a more severe penalty than a pecuniary fine.
11. Marcianus, On Public Prosecutions, Book II.
It is the duty of the judge to be careful not to impose a sentence which is
either more or less severe than the case demands; for neither a reputation for
harshness, or the glory of clemency should be his aim; but, having carefully
weighed the circumstances of the case, we should decide whatever the matter
requires.
It is clear that in cases of minor importance, judges should be inclined to
lenity; and where heavier penalties are involved, while they must comply with
the stern requirements of the laws, they should temper them with some degree of
indulgence.
(1) Domestic thefts, if of trifling importance, should not be made the subject
of public prosecutions; and an accusation of this kind ought not to be
permitted when a slave is presented for trial by his master, or a freeman by
his patron in whose house he lives, or a laborer by anyone who hires his
services; for those are called domestic
thefts which slaves commit against their masters, freedmen against their
patrons, or hired laborers against those for whom they work.
(2) Moreover, a crime is committed either deliberately, or upon a sudden
impulse, or by chance. Robbers commit a crime deliberately when they organize.
Persons act by sudden impulse when they resort to violence, or to the use of
weapons, through drunkenness. A crime is committed by chance, if one man kills
another while hunting, when he aims a dart at a wild beast.
(3) To be thrown to wild beasts, or to suffer or be sentenced to similar
punishments, are capital penalties.
12. Macer, On the Duties of Governor, Book II.
With reference to the civil condition of persons who have been convicted, it
makes no difference whether the prosecution was public or not; for the
sentence, and not the kind of crime, is alone considered. Therefore, those who
are ordered to be punished in other ways, or who are delivered up to wild
beasts, instantly become penal slaves.
13. Ulpianus, On Appeals, Book I.
It is lawful, at present, when anyone has extraordinary jurisdiction of a
crime, to inflict any sentence which he may desire, either a more severe or a
lighter one; provided that, in neither instance, he exceeds the bounds of
reason.
14. Macer, On Military Affairs, Book II.
Certain offences, if committed by a civilian, either entail no penalty at all,
or merely a trifling one, while in the case of a soldier, they are severely
punished; for if a soldier follows the calling of a buffoon, or suffers himself
to be sold in slavery, Menander says that he should undergo capital punishment.
15. Venuleius Saturninus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book I.
The Divine Hadrian forbade those included in the order of de-curions to be
punished capitally, unless they had killed one of their parents. It is,
however, very clearly provided by the Imperial Mandates, that they should
suffer the penalty of the Cornelian Law.
16. Claudius Saturninus, On the Penalties of Civilians.
Acts such as theft or homicide; verbal statements, such as insults, or betrayal
by advocates; written ones, such as forgeries and criminal libels; and advice
such as is given in conspiracies and the agreements of thieves are punished,
for it is the same as a crime to assist others by persuasion.
(1) These four kinds of offences should be considered under seven different
heads; namely, the cause, the person, the place, the time, the quality, the
quantity, and the result.
(2) The cause, in the case of blows which are unpunished when inflicted by a
master or a parent; for the reason that they seem to be
given rather for the purpose of correction than injury. They are punishable
when anyone is beaten by a stranger in anger.
(3) The person is considered from two points of view: first, that of him who
committed the act; and second, that of him who suffered it; for otherwise
slaves would be punished differently from freedmen for the same offences. And
anyone who dares to attack his master or his father is punished differently
from one who raises his hand against a stranger, a teacher, or a private
individual. In the discussion of this subject age should also be taken into
account.
(4) The place renders the same act one either of theft or sacrilege, and
determines whether it should be punished with death or with a penalty of less
severity.
(5) The time distinguishes a person temporarily absent from a fugitive, and a
housebreaker or a daylight thief from one who commits the crime by night.
(6) The quality, when the act is either more atrocious or less grave, as
manifest thefts are usually distinguished from those that are non-manifest;
quarrels from highway robberies; pillage from ordinary theft; impudence from
violence. On this point Demosthenes, the greatest orator of the Greeks, said:
"It is not the wound but the disgrace which causes the insult, for it is not a
wicked act to strike a freeman, but it becomes such when this is done by way of
insult; for 0 Athenians, he who strikes does many things which he who suffers
them cannot properly communicate to others, by his bearing, his aspect, or his
voice, when he smites with every evidence of contumely, as if he were an enemy,
whether he strikes with a rod, or delivers a blow in the eye. These things are
productive of annoyance, and cause men who are not accustomed to be insulted to
become beside themselves."
(7) The quantity distinguishes a common theft from one who drives away a herd
of cattle, for anyone who steals a sow shall be punished merely as a thief; and
he who drives away a number of animals shall be punished as a cattle stealer.
(8) The result should also be considered even when it is brought about by a man
of the most amiable character; although the law does not punish with less
severity a person who was provided with a weapon for the purpose of killing a
man than him who actually killed him. Therefore, among the Greeks, crimes
committed by accident were expiated by voluntary exile, as was stated by the
most eminent of poets:
"When I was small, Menetius of Opontus conducted me into your house, on account
of a sad homicide; when on that day, I unintentionally and unwillingly enraged
over a game of dice, killed the son of Am-phidamantus."
(9) It happens that the same crimes are more severely punished in certain
provinces; as, for instance, in Africa, those who burn harvests ; in Mysia,
those who burn vines; and counterfeiters, where mines are situated.
(10) It sometimes happens that the punishments of certain malefactors are
rendered more severe whenever an example is necessary, as for the suppression
of many persons engaged in highway robbery.
17. Marcianus, Institutes, Book I.
Where anything is left by will to certain penal slaves, such as those who have
been condemned to the mines, and to work connected with the mines, it is
considered as not having been written, and as having been left, not to a slave
of the Emperor, but to a penal slave.
(1) Likewise, some persons, such as those who have been sentenced to hard labor
on the public works for life, or deported to an island, are deprived of
citizenship, so that they no longer enjoy any privileges derived from the Civil
Law, but retain whatever rights they are entitled to by the Law of Nations.
18. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book III.
No one suffers a penalty for merely thinking.
19. The Same, On the Edict, Book LVII.
If slaves are not defended by their masters, they should not, for this reason,
immediately be conducted to punishment, but should be permitted to defend
themselves, or be defended by another; and the judge who hears the case shall
inquire as to their innocence.
20. Paulus, On Plautius, Book XVIII.
When a penalty is inflicted upon anyone, it is provided by a legal fiction that
it shall not be transmitted to his heir; the reason for which seems to be that
punishment is established for the correction of man, and when he is dead
against whom it is held to have been established, it ceases to be applicable.
21. Celsus, Digest, Book XXXVII.
We understand the extreme penalty to mean only death.
22. Modestinus, Differences, Book I.
Where persons are sentenced to the mines, and, through illness or the
infirmities of age, they become incapable of performing labor, according to a
Rescript of the Divine Pius, they can be discharged by the Governor, who shall
decide whether they shall be released; provided they have relatives or
connections, and have served not less than ten years of their sentence.
23. The Same, Rules, Book Vill.
When anyone is condemned to the mines without a definite time being stated,
because of the ignorance of the judge who imposed the sentence, the term of ten
years will be understood to have been intended.
24. The Same, Pandects, Book XL
We must remember that the statues of those who have been relegated, or deported
for high treason, should be removed.
25. The Same, Pandects, Book XII.
If anyone remains for a long time under an accusation, his punishment should,
to some extent, be mitigated; for it has been decided that
those who have been accused for a considerable time should not be punished as
severely as those who have been tried and convicted without delay.
(1) No one can be sentenced to be thrown down from a rock.
26. Callistratus, On Judicial Inquiries, Book I.
The crime or the punishment of a father can place no stigma upon his son; for
each one is subjected to fate in accordance with his conduct, and no one. is
appointed the successor of the crime of another.
This was stated by the Divine Brothers in a Rescript addressed to the people of
Hierapolis.
27. The Same, On Judicial Inquiries, Book V.
The Divine Brothers stated in a Rescript to Harruntius Silo, that the Governors
of provinces were not accustomed to rescind judgments which they themselves had
rendered. They also stated in a Rescript addressed to Vetina of Italica, that
no judge could change his own decision, and that this was an unusual thing to
do. Where, however, anyone was falsely accused, and did not have at first the
documents to establish his innocence, which he afterwards found, and was
subjected to punishment, there are some Imperial Rescripts extant by which it
is provided that the penalty of such persons shall either be lessened, or that
they shall be entirely restored to their former condition. This, however, can
only be done by the Emperor.
(1) It is provided by the Imperial Mandates with reference to Decurions, and
civil officials who have been guilty of capital crimes, that if anyone appears
to have committed an offence for which he should be relegated to an island
outside of the province, the facts, together with the sentence imposed, should
be submitted to the Emperor in writing by the Governor.
(2) In another Section of the Imperial Mandates, it is provided as follows:
"When any of the officials of a town have committed robbery, or any other crime
which seems to deserve capital punishment, you shall place them in chains, and
write to me, and also state what crime each of them has perpetrated."
28. The Same, On Judicial Inquiries, Book VI.
The following is the gradation of capital crimes. The extreme penalty is
considered to be sentence to the gallows, or burning alive. Although the latter
seems, with good reason, to have been included in the term "extreme penalty,"
still, because this kind of punishment was invented subsequently, it appears to
come after the first, just as decapitation does. The next penalty to death is
that of labor in the mines. After that comes deportation to an island.
(1) Other penalties have reference to reputation, without incurring the danger
of death; as, for instance, relegation for a certain term of years, or for
life, or to an island; or sentence to labor on the public works; or where the
culprit is subjected to the punishment of whipping.
(2) It is not customary for all persons to be whipped, but only men who are
free and of inferior station; those of higher rank are not subjected to the
penalty of castigation.
This is specially provided by the Imperial Rescripts.
(3) Some persons who are ordinarily called young are, in some turbulent cities,
accustomed to encourage the clamors of the mob. If they have not done anything
more than this, and have not previously been warned by the Governor, they are
punished by being whipped, or are even forbidden to be present at exhibitions.
If, however, after having been corrected in this way they are again detected
committing the same offence, they should be punished with exile, and sometimes
with death; that is to say, when they have frequently acted in a seditious or
turbulent manner, and, having been arrested several times, and treated with too
much clemency, they have persevered in their bold designs.
(4) Slaves who have been whipped are usually restored to their masters.
(5) And, generally speaking, I should say that all those whom it is not
permitted to punish by whipping are persons that should have the same respect
shown them that decurions have. For it would be inconsistent to hold that
anyone whom the Emperors have, by their Constitutions, forbidden to be whipped,
should be sentenced to the mines.
(6) The Divine Hadrian stated in a Rescript: "No one should be condemned to the
mines for a specified term, but anyone who is sentenced for a term, and
performs labor connected with the mines, ought not to be understood to be
condemned to the mines; for his liberty continues to exist as long as he is not
condemned to labor for life." Hence, women sentenced in this way have children
who are free.
(7) It is forbidden to seek sanctuary at the statues or portraits of the
Emperor, in order to cause another injury; for as the laws afford equal
security to all men, it seems reasonable that he who takes refuge at the
statues or the portraits of the Emperor does so rather in order to injure
another than to provide for his own safety, unless someone who was confined in
chains or in prison by persons more powerful than himself has recourse to this
safeguard; for such persons ought to be excused. The Senate decreed that no one
shall flee for refuge to the statues or portraits of the Emperor; and the
Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that anyone who carried before him an image of
the Emperor, for the purpose of incurring the hatred of another, should be
punished by being placed in chains.
(8) All offences committed against a patron or the son of a patron, a father, a
near relative, a husband, a wife, or other persons to whom anyone is nearly
related, should be punished with more severity than if they were committed
against strangers.
(9) Poisoners should be punished with death, or if it is necessary to show
respect to their rank, they should be deported.
(10) Highwaymen, who pursue this occupation for the sake of booty, are regarded
as greatly resembling thieves; and when they make an attack and rob while
armed, they are punished with death, if they
have committed this crime repeatedly and on the highways; others are sentenced
to the mines, or relegated to islands.
(11) Slaves who have plotted against the lives of their masters are generally
put to death by fire; sometimes freemen, also, suffer this penalty, if they are
plebeians and persons of low rank.
(12) Incendiaries are punished with death when, either induced by enmity or for
the sake of plunder, they have caused a fire in the interior of a town; and
they are generally burned alive. Those also who have "burned a house or a hut,
in the country, are punished a little more leniently. For if accidental fires
could have been avoided, and were caused by the negligence of those on whose
premises they originated, and resulted in injury to the neighbors; the
responsible parties are prosecuted civilly to enable anyone who has suffered
loss to recover damages, or they may be subjected to moderate punishment.
(13) A graduated scale of penalties with reference to exiles was established by
an Edict of the Divine Hadrian, so that if anyone who was relegated for a term
returned before it expired, he should be relegated to an island; and if one who
was relegated to an island left it, he should be deported to an island; and if
anyone, after having been deported, escaped, he should be punished with death.
(14) The same Emperor stated in a Rescript, that a certain gradation should be
observed with reference to prisoners, that is to say, those who were sentenced
for a certain term should, under similar circumstances, be sentenced for life;
those who had been sentenced for life should be condemned to the mines; and
when those have been condemned to the mines committed such an act, they should
suffer the extreme penalty.
(15) It has been held by many authorities that notorious robbers should be
hanged in those very places which they had subjected to pillage, in order that
others might be deterred by their example from perpetrating the same crimes,
and that it might be a consolation to the relatives and connections of the
persons who had been killed that the penalty should be inflicted in the same
place where the robbers committed the homicides. Some also condemned them to be
thrown to wild beasts.
(16) Our ancestors, in inflicting every penalty, treated slaves more harshly
than persons who are free; and they punished those who are notorious with
greater severity than men of good reputation.
29. Gaius, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book I.
Those who have been sentenced to death immediately lose both their citizenship
and their freedom. Therefore, this condition attaches to them while living, and
sometimes affects them for a long time; which happens to those who are
condemned to be thrown to wild beasts, 'for they are frequently kept after
having been sentenced, in order that they may be tortured to obtain evidence
against others.
30. Modestinus, On Penalties, Book I.
If anyone should do something by which weak-minded persons are terrified
through superstition, the Divine Marcus stated in a Rescript that men of this
kind should be relegated to an island.
31. The Same, On Punishments, Book III.
The Governor should not, in order to obtain the favor of the people, discharge
persons who have been condemned to be thrown to wild beasts. If, however, the
culprits have strength or skill worthy of being used for the benefit of the
Roman people, he should consult the Emperor.
The Divine Severus and Antoninus stated in a Rescript, that it was not
permitted to transfer persons who have been sentenced, from one province to
another, without the consent of the Emperor.
32. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book VI.
If a Governor or a judge should make the statement: "You have committed
violence," in proceedings under an interdict, the defendant shall not be
branded with infamy, nor shall the penalty of the Julian Law be inflicted.
When, however, this is done during the prosecution of a crime, it is another
thing.
What would be the rule if the Governor should not make a distinction in the
application of the Julian Law relating to Public Offences, and that relating to
private ones? It must then be held that proceedings have been instituted for
the punishment of a crime. But, if the defendant is accused of offences under
both laws, the one which is less severe, that is to say, the one relating to
private violence should be followed.
33. Papinianus, Questions, Book II.
The Imperial Brothers stated in a Rescript that slaves who have been condemned
to chains for a term could, after having served it, receive either their
freedom, an estate, or a legacy; because a temporary punishment based from a
judgment is equivalent to an annulment of the penalty. If, however, the benefit
of freedom comes to them while in chains, the reason of the law and the words
of the constitution are opposed to freedom. It is evident that if freedom was
granted by a will, and that when the estate was entered upon, the time of the
sentence had expired, the slave is understood to have been lawfully manumitted
; not otherwise than if a debtor should manumit a slave given by way of pledge,
and the estate should be entered upon after the pledge had been released.
34. The Same, Opinions, Book XVI.
Aslave cannot be sentenced to perpetual labor on the public works; and, with
much more reason, he cannot be sentenced to labor dn them for a term.
Therefore, in a case where one who was condemned to the public works for a
term, through mistake, I gave it as my opinion that, after the time had
expired, the slave should be restored to his master.
(1) I also gave it as my opinion that, according to the Decree of the Senate,
those persons are liable to the penalty of informers who, by the intervention
of a third party, caused an informer to commit the offence.
35. Callistratus, Questions, Book I.
It is provided by the Imperial Mandates, which are communicated to Governors,
that no one shall be sentenced to chains for life; and this was also stated by
the Divine Hadrian in a Rescript.
36. Hermogenianus, Epitomes, Book I.
Those who are condemned to the mines, or to the service of the criminals who
labor there, become penal slaves.
37. Paulus, Sentences, Book I.
It has been held that dardanariiwho make use of false measures shall, for the
purpose of protecting the welfare of the people with reference to food, be
punished arbitrarily, according to the nature of the crime.
38. The Same, Sentences, Book V.
Where anyone has stolen any metal or money belonging to the Emperor, he shall
be punished with the penalty of the mines and with exile.
(1) Deserters who go over to the enemy, or who reveal our plans, shall either
be burned alive, or hanged on a gallows.
(2) Instigators of sedition and of tumult, which result in the uprising of the
people, shall, in accordance with their rank, either be hanged upon a gallows,
thrown to wild beasts, or deported to an island.
(3) Any persons who corrupt virgins that are not yet marriageable, if of low
rank, shall be sentenced to the mines; if of more exalted station, shall be
relegated to an island, or sent into exile.
(4) Anyone who cannot prove that he was purchased with his own money cannot
demand his freedom; and he will besides be restored to his master under the
penalty of being confined in chains; or if the master himself prefers he shall
be sentenced to the mines.
(5) Those who administer a beverage for the purpose of producing abortion, or
of causing affection, although they may not do so with malicious intent, still,
because the act offers a bad example, shall, if of humble rank, be sent to the
mines; or, if higher in degree, shall be relegated to an island, with the loss
of a portion of their property. If a man or a woman should lose his or her life
through such an act, the guilty party shall undergo the extreme penalty.
(6) A will which is void by law can be suppressed with impunity; for there is
nothing which can be claimed under it, or can actually exist.
(7) Anyone who opens the will of anyone who is still living, and reads and
reseals it, is liable to the penalty of the Cornelian Law; and, as a rule,
persons of inferior rank are condemned to the mines, and those of superior
station are deported to an island.
(8) If anyone should prove that the documents relating to his suit have been
delivered by his attorney to his adversary, the said attorney, if of inferior
rank, shall be sentenced to the mines, and if of
higher station, shall be relegated for life, and deprived of half his property.
(9) When anyone, who holds documents deposited with him, transfers them to a
third party in the absence of him who deposited them, or delivers them to the
adversary of the latter, he shall either be sentenced to the mines, or deported
to an island, according to his legal condition.
(10) Where judges are alleged to have been corrupted by money, their names are
usually erased by the Governor from the records of the court; or they are sent
into exile, or relegated for a term.
(11) The soldier who, having been given a sword, escapes from prison, is
punished with death. He who deserts with one whom he was appointed to guard is
liable to the same penalty.
(12) A soldier who has attempted to kill himself, and did not succeed, shall be
punished with death, unless he committed the act through being unable to endure
suffering, disease, or grief of some kind, or for some other good reason;
otherwise, he should be dishonorably discharged.
39. Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book X.
Cicero, in his oration for Cluentius Avitus, said that when he was in Asia, a
certain Milesian woman, having received money from certain substituted heirs,
produced an abortion on herself, by means of drugs, and was sentenced to death.
If, however, any woman, after a divorce, should commit a violent act upon her
viscera, for the reason that she was pregnant and did not wish to bear a son to
her husband, whom she hated, she ought to be punished by temporary exile; as
was stated by our most excellent Emperors in a Rescript.
40. Paulus, Decrees, Book HI.
It was decided that Metrodorus, for having knowingly harbored a fleeing enemy,
should be deported to an island; and that Philoctetis, who was aware that he
was concealed, and kept the fact secret for a long time, should be relegated to
an island.
41. Papinianus, Definitions, Book II,
The sanction of the laws, which, in the last section, impose a certain penalty
upon those who do not obey their precepts, is not held to apply to those cases
in which a penalty is specifically added by the law itself, and there is no
doubt that in every law the species is subordinated to the genus. Nor is it
probable that one crime should be punished by different penalties under the
same law.
42. Hermogenianus, Epitomes, Book I.
By the interpretation of the laws, penalties should rather be mitigated than
increased in severity.
43. Paulus, Opinions, Book I.
The Emperor Antoninus stated in a Rescript addressed to Aurelius Atilianus: "A
Governor cannot forbid anyone the use of his trade for a longer time than that
included in his administration."
(1) He also said that, "Anyone who, by the commission of some offence, has lost
the honor of being a decurion, cannot claim the privileges of the son of a
decurion in order to escape the infliction of a penalty."

* 48.XX. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF PERSONS WHO HAVE BEEN CONVICTED.

1. Callistratus, On the Rights of the Treasury and the People, Book I.
In consequence of conviction, property is confiscated either when life or
citizenship is forfeited, or a servile condition is imposed.
(1) Even those who have been conceived before conviction and born afterwards
are entitled to portions of the estates of their convicted parents.
(2) This portion, however, is not granted to children unless they are born in
lawful marriage.
(3) No share is given to the children of one who has only been deprived of half
his property. This was stated by the Divine Brothers in a Rescript.
2. The Same, On Judicial Inquiries, Book VI.
It is not necessary to strip a person of his clothing when he is placed in
prison, but only after he has been sentenced. This was stated by the Divine
Hadrian in a Rescript.
3. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIII.
Under five laws, the dowry of a convicted woman is confiscated, namely, for
high treason, public violence, parricide, poisoning, and assassination.
4. Papinianus, On Adultery, Book II.
Every husband is always entitled to actions against the Treasury.
5. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIII.
If, however, the woman is punished with death under some other law which does
not confiscate her dowry, for the reason that she first becomes a penal slave,
it is true that her dowry passes to her husband just as if she were dead.
(1) Marcellus says that if a daughter under paternal control is deported, her
marriage is not dissolved by the mere fact of her deportation, and this opinion
is correct; for, as the woman remains free, nothing prevents the husband from
retaining his marital affection,
or the woman from retaining her affection as a wife. Therefore, if the woman
has the intention of leaving her husband, Marcellus says that the father can
then institute proceedings to recover her dowry. If, however, she is the mother
of a family, and is deported during the existence of the marriage, the dowry
will remain in the hands of the husband; but if the marriage is subsequently
dissolved, she can bring her action, just as if, through considerations of
humanity, the right to do so had recently been acquired.
6. The Same, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book X.
The Divine Hadrian stated in a Rescript to Aquilius Bradua: "It is evident
that, by the name itself, one ought to understand what is meant by 'clothing.'
For no one can reasonably say that under this term is included the property of
persons who have been condemned, for if anyone is wearing a girdle, no one
should claim it on this ground; but any clothing which he wears, or any small
sums of money which he may have in his possession for the purpose of living, or
any light rings, that is to say, any which are not worth more than five
aurei,can be demanded.
"Otherwise, if the convicted person should have on his finger a sardonyx, or
any other precious stone of great value, or have in his possession any note
calling for a large sum of money, this can, by no right, be retained as part of
his clothing."
Clothing of which a man can be stripped are those things which he brought with
him when he was placed in prison, and with which he is attired when he is
conducted to punishment, as the name itself indicates. Hence, neither the
executioners nor their assistants can claim these things as spoils at the
moment when the culprit is executed.
Governors should not appropriate these articles for their own benefit, or
suffer assistants or jailors to profit by this money, but they ought to
preserve it for expenditures which Governors have the right to make; as, for
instance, for paper for the use of certain officials; or as donations for
soldiers who have distinguished themselves by their courage; or to be presented
to barbarians belonging to an embassy; or for some other purpose. Frequently,
moreover, Governors have paid into the Treasury sums of money which they had
collected, which is a manifestation of too great diligence, as it will be
sufficient if they do not appropriate it to their own use, but permit it to be
employed for the benefit of their office.
7. Paulus, On the Shares Granted to the Children of Persons Who Have Been
Convicted.
As natural reason, which is a certain kind of tacit law, grants to children the
estates of their fathers, calling them to the succession in the same way as to
a debt, oh this account the name of direct heirs has been conferred upon them
by the Civil Law; so that, as they cannot be removed from the succession by the
will of their parents, unless for a good reason, it has been thought to be
perfectly just that, in cases
in which the conviction of a parent deprives him of his property as a penalty,
the children should be taken into consideration, for fear they may suffer a
more severe penalty for offences committed by others, whose guilt did not
involve them, by subjecting them to the greatest poverty. It was decided that,
under such circumstances, a certain degree of moderation should be displayed;
so that those who would have been entitled to the entire estate by the right of
inheritance might have some portion of the same conceded to them.
(1) When a freedman is punished, any of his property which his patron would
have been entitled to if his freedman had died a natural death should not be
taken from him; but the remaining part of the estate which had no reference to
his manumission shall be forfeited to the Treasury.
(2) It is just that certain portions of the property of persons who have been
condemned should be given to adopted, as well as to natural children, if the
adoption was not fraudulently made. An adoption is considered to be made for
the purpose of fraud where anyone adopts a child, although he has not yet been
accused, but, aware of the desperate condition of his affairs, is influenced by
the fear of an impending accusation, in order that a part of the property which
he thinks he is about to lose may be saved.
(3) Where the condemned person has several children, examples have been adduced
in which all of his estate has been granted to several children. The Divine
Hadrian stated in a Rescript: "The number of the children of Albinus causes me
to look favorably upon their case, as I prefer that my empire should be
increased by the addition of men, rather than by that of money; therefore I
wish the property of their father to be given to them, which so many possessors
will render evident, especially if they should obtain all of his estate."
(4) Again, any property which the convicted person has acquired by crime does
not increase the share of the children; for instance, if he has caused a
relative of his to be killed, and enters upon his estate, or obtains pratorian
possession of the same; for this was established by the Divine Pius in a
Rescript. Consequently, where a son under paternal control had been convicted
of killing, by means of poison, a person by whom he had been appointed heir;
the above-mentioned Emperor rendered the decision that, although he had entered
upon the estate by the order of his father, under whose control he was at the
time, it should be forfeited to the Treasury.
(5) If the person whose property has been confiscated has been relegated,
anything acquired by him after conviction shall belong to his testamentary
heirs or to his heirs at law; for anyone who has been relegated to an island
enjoys the right to make a will, as well as all other rights.
If, however, he has been deported, he cannot have an heir, because he has lost
his citizenship; and any property subsequently acquired will be forfeited to
the Treasury.
8. Marcianus, Book.
The right of patrons is preserved unimpaired for their children, so far as the
property of a freedman of their father, whose property has been confiscated, is
concerned. If the son of the patron appears, the Treasury can claim nothing of
the share to which he is entitled.
(1) Where, however, there is a son of the patron, and a son of the freedman as
well, the former will be excluded; and there will still be more reason for us
to hold that there will be no ground for forfeiture to the Treasury, as
children of the freedman exclude those of the patron, and those of the patron
exclude the Treasury.
(2) But even if the son of the patron does not desire to demand praetorian
possession of the estate, it is established that the Treasury will be excluded
from that portion of the property of the freedman of his father to which he is
entitled.
(3) The property of a person who has been relegated is not confiscated, unless
this is expressly done by the terms of the sentence; but the rights of freedmen
cannot be taken away by a special sentence, because the Emperor alone can
deprive a relegated person of them.
(4) When a father, who has given a dowry for his daughter, is convicted,
nothing is forfeited to the Treasury, even if the daughter should die
afterwards during marriage, in which case the profecticial dowry will revert to
the father. Therefore it will remain in the hands of her husband.
9. Callistratus, Book.
Unless it is proved that the father, through apprehension of conviction, and in
order to defraud the Treasury, has consulted the interests of the children.
10. Marcianus, Book.
Even if the father has promised a dowry for his daughter, and has been
convicted, an action to recover the dowry from the estate of the father will be
granted to the husband against the Treasury.
(1) Where a father has been convicted, after the dissolution of the marriage of
the daughter, and, indeed, after the daughter has given her consent for him to
have the dowry, the Treasury can recover it from the husband; but, before she
gives her consent, the daughter herself will have a right to recover her dowry.
11. The Same, Book.
When anyone who has been convicted appeals, and dies while the appeal is
pending, his property is not confiscated; for even a second will, if he should
make one, will be valid. The same must be said even if the appeal is rejected.
(1) A defendant, except when accused of high treason, can administer his own
property, pay his debts, and receive what is due to him, if it is paid in good
faith; but every alienation which he has made for the purpose of defrauding the
Treasury after his conviction can be set aside.

* 48.XXI. CONCERNING THE PROPERTY OF THOSE WHO HAVE EITHER KILLED THEMSELVES OR CORRUPTED THEIR ACCUSERS BEFORE JUDGMENT HAS BEEN RENDERED.

1. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book Vill.
It was decreed by.the Emperors that where capital crimes were involved, he who
corrupts his adversary is not liable to punishment, except in such cases as
incur the penalty of death; for it was their opinion that they who desire to
save the life of a blood relative by any means whatever should be excused.
2. Macer, Public Prosecutions, Book II.
The Emperors Severus and Antoninus to Julius Julianus: Those who are said by
robbers to have corrupted their accuser, and are dead, are considered to have
confessed their crime, and hence to have left no defence to their heirs.
(1) Where anyone, concerning whose punishment a communication has been sent to
the Emperor, for instance, because he was a de-curion, or should have been
deported to an island, and he dies before the Emperor has sent his reply, it
may be asked whether he should be considered to have died before judgment. This
question may be said to have been settled by a Decree of the Senate, which was
enacted with reference to persons who were transferred to Rome, and died before
judgment was rendered. The terms of this decree are as follows: "As no one can
be considered to have been condemned during this year, before judgment in his
case has been rendered and made public at Rome; no property belonging to a
deceased person shall be confiscated before judgment in his case has been made
public at Rome; and his   heirs can take possession of his estate."
3. Marcianus, On Informers.
Persons who have been accused, or have been caught while committing a crime,
and, through fear of impending accusation, kill themselves, have no heirs.
Papinianus, nevertheless, in the Sixteenth Book of Opinions, says that where
persons who have not yet been accused of crime, lay violent hands on
themselves, their property shall not be confiscated by the Treasury; for it is
not the wickedness of the deed that renders it punishable, but it is held that
the consciousness of guilt entertained by the defendant is considered to take
the place of a confession. Hence, the property of those who ought to be
accused, or have been caught committing a crime, or who have killed themselves,
should be confiscated.
(1) Moreover, as the Divine Pius stated in a Rescript, the property of anyone
who kills himself after he has been accused should be confiscated by the
Treasury only where he was accused of a crime for which, if he were convicted,
he could be punished with death or deportation.
(2) He also stated in a Rescript that anyone who is charged with a theft of
little importance, although he may have put an end to his life while the
accusation was pending, should not be considered to be in a position that would
justify his heirs being deprived of his estate; as he himself would not have
been deprived of it if he had been found guilty of theft.
(3) Therefore, in conclusion, it should be said that the property of him who
has laid violent hands on himself should be forfeited to the Treasury, if he
was implicated in the crime to such an extent that he would have lost his
property if he had been convicted.
(4) If, however, anyone, through weariness of life, or incapacity to suffer
pain, or, for any other reason, should put an end to his life, the Divine
Antoninus stated in a Rescript that he could have a successor.
(5) Moreover, where a father laid violent hands on himself because he was said
to have killed his son, he was considered to have done so rather on account of
grief for the loss of his child, and hence, as the Divine Hadrian stated in a
Rescript, his property should not be confiscated.
(6) A distinction should be made in these cases, for it makes a difference for
what reason a person commits suicide, just as when the question is asked
whether he who did so and did not succeed should be punished as having imposed
sentence upon himself; for, by all means, he should be punished, unless he was
compelled to take this step through weariness of life, or because he was
incapable of enduring pain of some description. This is reasonable, for he
should be punished if he laid violent hands on himself without any cause, as he
who did not spare himself would still less spare another.
(7) It is, however, provided by the Imperial Mandates that the property of
those who die either while in confinement or at liberty under bond shall not be
confiscated, as long as the result of their cases is uncertain.
(8) But, where anyone has committed suicide without having a just cause for
doing so, and dies after an accusation has been filed, and his heirs are ready
to defend his case and show that he was innocent, let us see whether they
should be heard, and whether his property should be confiscated to the Treasury
before the crime has been proved, or if it should be confiscated under all
circumstances. The Divine Pius stated in a Rescript addressed to Modestus
Taurinus that when the heirs are prepared to undertake the defence, the
property should not be confiscated unless the commission of the crime is
proved.

* 48.XXII. CONCERNING PERSONS WHO ARE INTERDICTED, RELEGATED, AND DEPORTED.

1. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book IV.
The beginning of the Rescript of the Divine Trajan to Didius Se-cundus is as
follows: "I am aware that the property of persons who
have been relegated has been confiscated to the Treasury by the avarice of
former ages, but a different course is agreeable to my clemency, as I wish to
give this additional example to show that I have favored innocence during my
reign."

2. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIII.
The Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that anyone who has been deported cannot
be manumitted.

3. Alfenus, Epitomes, Book I.
He who has lost his citizenship does not deprive his children of any rights,
except those which would pass to them from him if he should die intestate while
in the enjoyment of his citizenship; that is to say, his estate, his freedmen,
and anything else of this kind that can be found. Whatever, indeed, is not
derived from their father but from their family, from their town, and from the
nature of things, will remain theirs entirely. Therefore, brothers who are
legitimate will become heirs to one another, and will be entitled to the
guardianship and estates of agnates, for not their father, but their ancestors,
-gave them these rights.

4. Marcianus, Institutes, Book II.
Persons who have been relegated to an island retain their children under their
control, for the reason that they retain all their other rights, as they are
only forbidden to leave the island; and they also retain all their property,
except that which has already been taken from them, for those who are either
sent into perpetual exile or relegated can, by the sentence, be deprived of a
portion of their property.

5. The Same, Rules, Book I.
Exile is of a threefold nature; interdiction of certain places, or of secret
flight; or all places are forbidden except one which is designated ; or
confinement to one island is prescribed, that is to say, relegation to a single
island.

6. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book IX.
Among the penalties is also included deportation to an island, which deprives
the person of Roman citizenship.
(1) The right of deportation to an island is not granted to the Governors of
provinces, although it is granted to the Prefect of the City, for this is
stated in an Epistle of the Divine Severus to Fabius Cilo, Urban Prefect.
Therefore, whenever the Governor of a province thinks that anyone ought to be
deported to an island, he should notify the person himself, and also send his
name to the Emperor, in order that he may be deported; and then write to the
Emperor stating his opinion fully, so that the latter may determine whether his
sentence should be executed, and the culprit be deported to an island; and, in
the meantime, until the answer is given, he must order him to remain in prison.
(2) The decurions of cities (as was stated by the Divine Brothers in a
Rescript), should be either deported or relegated on account of capital crimes.
And, in fact, they ordere3 Priscus, who, before being tortured, confessed that
he had committed homicide and arson, to be deported to an island.

7. The Same, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book II.
There are two kinds of relegated persons; first, those who are merely relegated
to an island; and second, others who are forbidden to enter the provinces, but
to whom no island is assigned.
(1) The Governors of provinces can relegate persons to an island, iprovided
they have under their control one that belongs to the province over which they
have jurisdfction; and they can specifically designate this island, and
relegate the culprit to it. But if they have not such an island under their
control, they can sentence the guilty party to be relegated to an island, and
then write to the Emperor in order that he can assign one to them. They cannot,
however, sentence anyone to an island which does not form part of the province
over which they have jurisdiction. In the meantime, until the Emperor assigns
an island, the person who is relegated is placed in charge of the military.
(2) The following difference exists between persons who are deported, and those
who are relegated, that is to say, anyone can be relegated to an island for a
certain term, or for life.
(3) When anyone is relegated for a certain term or for life, he retains the
right of Roman citizenship, and does not lose the power to make a will.
(4) It is established by certain rescripts, that neither all, nor even a
portion of their property, can be taken from persons who have been relegated
for a certain term; and judgment depriving persons relegated of a part or of
all of their property have been censured, but not to the extent of invalidating
such judgments.
(5) A certain kind of relegation, like that to an island, exists in the
Province of Egypt, that is to say, relegation to'an oasis.
(6) However, as no one can relegate a person to an island not under his
control, so, he has no right to relegate him to a province which is not in his
jurisdiction; as, for example, the Governor of Syria cannot relegate anyone to
Macedonia.
(7) He can, however, relegate him outside of his province.
(8) Likewise, he can relegate anyone to remain in a certain specified part of
his province; for instance, he may forbid him to leave a certain city, or a
certain district.
(9) I am aware that Governors are accustomed to relegate persons to the most
desert parts of their provinces.
(10) Anyone can forbid a person to live in the province which he governs, but
he cannot do so in another. This was stated by the Divine Brothers in a
Rescript. The result of this was, that anyone who was relegated from the
province in which he had his domicile could go and live in that in which he was
born. Our Emperor and his Di-
vine Brothers, however, provided for this contingency; for they stated in a
Rescript addressed to Probus, the Governor of the Province of Spain, that:
"Anyone can be forbidden to remain in the province in which he had been born by
the official who governs the province where the person had his domicile."
Still, it is just that those who are not residents of the province in which
they committed the offence should be judged in accordance with the terms of
this Rescript.
(11) It has been doubted whether anyone can prohibit another from remaining in
the province in which he was born, when he himself governs the province in
which the person lives, and he does not forbid him to remain in his own
province; as Governors are accustomed to make Italy the object of the
interdiction, and do not forbid the culprits to enter their own country; or
whether it consequently appears that even the province in which they govern has
been interdicted. This latter opinion should be adopted.
(12) On the other hand, he who governs the province where the party in
question was born has no right to forbid him to dwell in the province which he
now inhabits.
(13) Where anyone confesses a judgment, so that he who has committed an offence
in one province can be relegated by the Governor of that province, the result
will be that the person relegated must avoid the three provinces, except Italy;
that is, the one in which he committed the offence; the one in which he lives;
and the one in which he was born. If, either on account of his condition or
that of his parents or patrons, he is considered to have had his origin in
different provinces, we should say that he has, in consequence, been forbidden
several provinces.
(14) Nevertheless, certain Governors have been permitted to interdict several
provinces, as for instance, the Governors of Syria and of Dacia.
(15) It has been decided that anyone who has been forbidden to reside in his
native province should also remain away from Rome; and, on the other hand, if
anyone has been forbidden to reside at Rome he will not be considered to have
been forbidden to live in his own country. This has been provided by several
constitutions.
(16) If it is clear that not one's native country, but some particular city has
been forbidden him, let us see if we cannot say that his native province, as
well as the City of Rome, have also been forbidden him, which is the better
opinion.
(17) A day should be fixed by the Governor for the departure of persons who
have been relegated, and this is usually done; for it is customary to render
the decision as follows: "I relegate So-and-So from this province, and from
these islands, and he must depart before such-and-such a day."
(18) The Divine Brothers stated in a Rescript that a person who had been
relegated is certainly entitled to present a petition to the Emperor.
(19) Moreover, the sentence usually prohibits persons from residing in the
territory of their native province or city, or within the
walls of the latter, or from leaving it, or from stopping in certain suburbs of
the same.
(20) It is customary to forbid decurions to enjoy the privileges of their
order, either temporarily or permanently.
(21) Likewise, the penalty can be imposed upon anyone not to accept any honor,
and this does not have the effect of causing him to cease to act as decurion;
as, indeed, anyone may be a decurion, and still not be permitted to accept any
honors, for anyone can be a senator, and still not be able to demand any.
(22) Anyone can also be forbidden to receive a single honor, in such a way,
however, that he who is forbidden to do so can not only obtain this particular
honor, but also those which are greater; for it would be extremely ridiculous
for a person who was prohibited by way of penalty from receiving inferior
honors to be able to aspire to greater ones. Nevertheless, one who has been
prohibited from receiving certain honors is not prevented from seeking those
which are inferior ; but if anyone is forbidden to accept an office by way of
penalty, the sentence will be void, for a penalty cannot bestow immunity.
Therefore, if someone is deprived of honors, by way of penalty, it can be said
that where the said honors include an office involving great expense, the
infamy of the convicted person will not benefit him on this account.

8. Marcianus, Public Prosecutions, Book II.
But I think that when he is deprived of the honor, he should be compelled to
pay the expenses.

9. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book X.
AGovernor can sentence anyone not to leave his own house.

10. Marcianus, Book.
But not avoid incurring necessary expenses.

11. Ulpianus, Book.
Sometimes persons who have been relegated are sentenced to pay a fine.

12. Marcianus, Book.
A man who has been relegated from his town, and does not depart, shall be
relegated from his province for a certain time.

13. Paulus, Book.
Anyone who has been manumitted by a person who has been relegated cannot go to
Rome, because his patron is not permitted to do so.

14. Ulpianus, Book.
A person who is relegated is one who is forbidden temporarily or perpetually to
remain in a province, or at Rome, or in the region surrounding it.
(1) A great difference exists between deportation and relegation, for
deportation deprives a person of his rights as a citizen, as well as of his
property. Relegation does not deprive him of either, unless his property is,
for some special reason, confiscated.
(2) Anyone can be relegated by the Emperor, the Senate, the prefects, and the
Governors of provinces, but not by the Consul.
(3) Anyone who has lost his rights of citizenship, but retains his property, is
liable to pratorian actions.

15. Marcianus, Book.
A person who is deported loses his rights as a citizen, but not his freedom;
and, indeed, he cannot enjoy any special right derived from citizenship, but he
can enjoy a right of nations; for he can purchase and sell, hire and lease,
exchange property, lend money at interest, and do everything of this kind; and
he can also give and pledge any property which he may subsequently acquire,
unless he encumbers it in order to defraud the Treasury, which will succeed to
him after his death; for he cannot alienate any property which has been
confiscated.
(1) Anyone who has been deported by a Governor, without the sanction of the
Emperor, can become an heir and receive legacies left to him by will.

16. The Same, Book.
Ulpianus Damascenus petitioned the Emperor to allow him to leave to his mother
what was necessary for her support, and his mother, through her freedman, to
permit him to leave something to her deported son; whereupon the Emperor
Antoninus addressed to them a Rescript as follows: "Neither an estate, nor a
legacy, nor a trust can be left to persons of this kind, in violation of custom
and public law, nor should the condition of such persons be changed. But as you
have made the request on account of affection, I will permit you to leave by
your last will sufficient for their support and their other necessities, and
they can take whatever is bequeathed to them on this account."
17. Pomponius, Book.
Anyone who has been relegated is not excluded from being honored by means of
statues and paintings.

18. The Same.
A person who has been relegated retains his condition, as well as the ownership
of his own property, and his paternal authority, unimpaired; whether he has
been relegated for a specified time, or for life.
(1) Deportation, however, is not for time.

19. Callistratus.
Anyone who has been relegated cannot remain at Rome, although this may not have
been included in the sentence, because it is the coun-
try of all persons. Nor can he remain in the city in which the Emperor lives,
nor in one through which he passes, because those only are permitted to look
upon the Emperor who can enter Rome, as the Emperor is the father of his
country.
(1) When sentence is passed upon men who are free, by which their property is
confiscated, such, for instance, as deportation to an island, as soon as it has
been imposed, they change their former condition, and are delivered up to their
punishment; unless something of the nature of high treason is involved, which
requires the penalty to be increased.

* 48.XXIII. CONCERNING PERSONS UPON WHOM SENTENCE HAS BEEN PASSED AND WHO HAVE BEEN RESTORED TO THEIR RIGHTS.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXVIII.
A patron who has been deported, and afterwards restored to his civil rights, is
admitted to the succession of a freedman.
(1) If, however, a person has been condemned to the mines, does his penal
servitude extinguish his right as a patron, even after his restoration? The
better opinion is that penal servitude does not extinguish his rights as a
patron.

2. The Same, Opinions, Book V.
When a person who has been deported and restored regains his rank by the
indulgence of the Emperor, but does not recover all his property, he can
neither be sued by his creditors nor by the Treasury. When, however, the power
of recovering his property also is offered him by the Emperor, and he prefers
to relinquish it, he cannot avoid any actions brought against him before he was
sentenced.

3. Papinianus, Opinions, Book XVI.
The Treasury retained the property of a man who was deported to an island,
after his punishment had been remitted. It is established that creditors before
his conviction have no rights of action against him who was their former
debtor. If, however, he recovers his property with the restitution of his rank,
praetorian actions will not be necessary, for direct actions will lie.
4. Paulus, Questions, Book XVII.
A woman sentenced to the mines brought forth a child which she had previously
conceived, and was afterwards restored to her rights by the Emperor. It is more
humane to hold that the rights of relationship were also restored to her.

* 48.XXIV. CONCERNING THE CORPSES OF PERSONS WHO ARE PUNISHED.

1. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book IX.
The bodies of those who are condemned to death should not be refused their
relatives; and the Divine Augustus, in the Tenth Book on his life, said that
this rule had been observed. At present, the bodies of those who have been
punished are only buried when this has been requested and permission granted;
and sometimes it is not permitted, especially where persons have been convicted
of high treason. Even the bodies of those who have been sentenced to be burned
can be claimed, in order that their bones and ashes, after having been
collected, may be buried.
2. Marcianus, Public Prosecutions, Book II.
If anyone has been deported to an island or relegated, his punishment continues
to exist even after his death, for it is not permitted for him to be taken
elsewhere and buried, without the consent of the Emperor; as Severus and
Antoninus repeatedly stated in Rescripts, and they frequently granted this as a
favor to many persons who requested it.
3. Paulus, Sentences, Book I.
The bodies of persons who have been punished should be given to whoever
requests them for the purpose of burial.
