BOOK XLVII.

TITLE I. CONCERNING PRIVATE OFFENCES
TITLE III. CONCERNING THE THEFT OF TIMBERS JOINED TO A BUILDING
TITLE IV. WHERE ANYONE WHO is ORDERED TO BE FREE BY THE TERMS OF A WILL, AFTER THE DEATH OF His MASTER AND BEFORE THE ESTATE is ENTERED UPON, is SAID TO HAVE STOLEN OR SPOILED SOMETHING
TITLE V. CONCERNING THEFT COMMITTED AGAINST CAPTAINS OF VESSELS, INNKEEPERS, AND LANDLORDS
TITLE VI. CONCERNING THEFTS ALLEGED TO HAVE BEEN MADE BY AN ENTIRE BODY OF SLAVES
TITLE VII. CONCERNING TREES CUT DOWN BY STEALTH
TITLE VIII. CONCERNING THE ROBBERY OF PROPERTY BY VIOLENCE, AND DISORDERLY ASSEMBLAGES
TITLE IX. CONCERNING FIRE, DESTRUCTION, AND SHIPWRECK, WHERE A BOAT OR A SHIP is TAKEN BY FORCE
TITLE X. CONCERNING INJURIES AND INFAMOUS LIBELS
TITLE XI CONCERNING THE ARBITRARY PUNISHMENT OF CRIME
TITLE XII. CONCERNING THE VIOLATION OF SEPULCHERS
TITLE XIII. CONCERNING EXTORTION
TITLE XIV. PAGE CONCERNING THOSE WHO STEAL CATTLE
TITLE XV. CONCERNING PREVARICATION ...............
TITLE XVI. CONCERNING THOSE WHO HARBOR CRIMINALS .
TITLE XVII. CONCERNING THIEVES WHO STEAL IN BATHS 5
TITLE XVIII. CONCERNING THOSE WHO BREAK OUT OF PRISON, AND PLUNDERERS
TITLE XIX. CONCERNING THE SPOLIATION OF ESTATES
TITLE XX. CONCERNING STELLIONATUS ..............
TITLE XXI. CONCERNING THE REMOVAL OF BOUNDARIES
TITLE XXII. CONCERNING ASSOCIATIONS AND CORPORATIONS
TITLE XXIII. CONCERNING POPULAR ACTIONS



THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS. BOOK XVLII.


TITLE I.
CONCERNING PRIVATE OFFENCES.


1. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLV.
The Civil Law prescribes that heirs shall not be liable to penal actions any
more than other successors, and therefore they cannot be sued for theft. But
although they are not liable in an action of theft, still they will be in one
to compel them to produce the property in question, if they have possession of
it, or if they have committed fraud to avoid being in possession; since when it
is once produced, they will be liable to be sued for its recovery. A personal
action will also lie against them.
(1) It is also established that an heir can bring an action of theft, as the
prosecution of certain crimes is conceded to heirs.1 In
1 The duty incumbent on the heir to avenge the death of his parents was a
.cardinal principle of the Roman Law. If he neglected to discharge this sacred
obligation he was excluded from the inheritance of the estate. This rule was,
of course, derived from the ancient doctrine of blood-feud, in accordance with
which all offences were private wrongs, to be expiated by the payment of
specified fines, .the application of the Lex Talionis,or some other method of
vengeance inflicted by the nearest descendant of the person injured. Every
system of ancient law recognized this principle, the persistence of which, even
in the presence of the highest civilization, is one of the most remarkable and
suggestive incidents of the Roman polity. It has been said with considerable
probability that the ground of the noxal action can be traced to the
application of this rule, which has survived to our time, in the responsibility
of an employer for the acts of his employees. The instinctive desire for self-
redress is to-day latent in the mind of every courageous member of a civilized
community, and probably never will be eradicated. When aggravated insult or
personal violence takes place, the first impulse of spirited self-respecting
man is not to have recourse to the courts, but to exercise the primitive right
of personal retribution, inherited and practised through countless generations.
The wager of battle and the modern duel are instances of the same doctrine, the
resort to private warfare for the redress of private wrongs. This privilege was
granted by the first of the Norman sovereigns, who introduced it into Britain,
by the following law: "Si Anglicus homo compellet aliquem Francigena/m per
bellum, de furto, vel homicidio, vel aliqua re pro qua bellum fieri debeat, vel
judicium inter duos homines, habeat plenam licencium hoc faciendi."(Ancient
Laws and Institutes of England, The Laws of King William the Conqueror, II, I.)
The substitution of a fine by way of compensation for the abandonment of this
right was, at first, entirely optional, the renunciation being conditional, and
if the property constituting the fine was not forthcoming, the parties were
held to be placed in their original position, and revenge could still be
exacted. Tacitus, in referring to this practice among the Germans, says that
the delivery of a certain number of cattle to the family of a murdered man was
considered as adequate satisfaction for the injury. "Levitur homicidium certo
armentorum ac pecorum numero; recipitque satisfactionem universa domus." (De
Moribus Germanorum,XXI.)
Appeals, or public accusations of serious offences made by private individuals
against one another, were generally associated with trial by combat. This
proceeding was also a matter of blood-feud, as the accuser was almost
invariably connected, either by consanguinity or marriage, with the person who
had suffered the wrong. The duty of vengeance usually devolved upon the heir or
the widow of the victim. "At Common Law a Woman as well as a Man might have had
an Appeal of the Death of any of her Ancestors."
"If the Husband is attainted of Treason, &c, and after killed, his Wife may
have an Appeal."
"None but the Heir by the course of the Common Law shall have an Appeal of the
Death of his Ancestor for though an Heir Female can have no appeal her
like manner, an heir is entitled to the action granted by the Aquilian Law; but
a suit for injury sustained will not lie in his favor.
(2) Not only in the action of theft, but also in other actions arising from
criminal offences, whether they are civil or praetorian, it is decided that the
crime follows the person.
2. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XLIII.
Where several criminal offences take place at the same time, this does not
cause impunity to be granted for any of them, for one crime does not diminish
the penalty for another.
(1) Therefore, where anyone robs a man and kills him, he is liable to an action
of theft, for the reason that he robbed him, and to the Aquilian action,
because he killed him; and neither one of these actions destroys the other.
(2) The same thing must be said if he robbed him by violence, and then killed
him, for he will be liable to an action for robbery with violence, as well as
under the Aquilian Law.
(3) Where a personal suit is brought for a slave who has committed theft, the
question arose, whether one could also be brought under the Aquilian Law.
Pomponius says that this can be done, because the action under the Aquilian Law
calls for a different valuation than the one to recover property which has been
stolen; as the Aquilian Law includes the greatest value of the stolen article
during the year preceding the offence; but the personal action for recovery on
account of theft does not go further back than the time of the joinder of
issue. If, however, a slave has committed these offences, no matter under what
noxal proceeding he may be surrendered, the other right of action will be
extinguished.
self, yet she shall prevent the Male from having any, as if a Man has issue a
Daughter only, and is killed, his brother shall have no Appeal."
"If the Wife kills the Husband, the Heir shall have an Appeal."
"If after the Death of the Ancestor, the Heir dies before or after an Appeal
commenced, another Heir shall not have one." (Danvers, A General Abridgment of
the Common Law, Vol. I, Pages 488, 489.) Appeal, as well as Wager of battle,
was abolished by Stat. 59, George III, c. 46. (Vide Pike, A History of Crime in
England, Vol. II, Page 623.)
The Mosaic Law, while inculcating the obligation of revenge as imperative and
holy, failure of whose observance entailed eternal infamy, did not countenance
its commentation by a fine; and in this respect the Jews differed from most of
the nations of antiquity.
"The revenger of blood himself shall slay the murderer; when he meeteth him, he
shall slay him."
"Moreover ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer, which is
guilty of death; but he shall be surely put to death." (Numbers XXXV, 19, 31.)
A regular schedule of fines for homicide existed among the ancient Welsh. The
murder fine for the head of a family was eighty-four cows. (The Ancient Laws of
Cambria, Page 210.)
With no people was the right of blood-feud more highly esteemed or sedulously
practiced than by the Anglo-Saxons.
"The right of private warfare, technically called fsehtheor feud, was one which
every Teutonic freeman considered as alienable, and which, coupled with the
obligations of family, was directly derived from his original position as a
freeman; it was the privilege which he possessed before he consented to enter
into any political bond, the common term upon which all freemen could meet in
an equal form of polity. It was an immediate corollary from that primeval law
of nature that each man may provide for his own defence, and use his own
energies to secure his own well-being and the quiet possession of his life, his
liberty, and the fruits of his labor. As Anglo-Saxon England advanced in
civilization and organization it becomes necessary to modify this universal
self-help. This was done in regard to all ordinary torts by affixing a specific
fine. The State took a portion of the fine as a compensation for its trouble in
interfering. The minuteness of these provisions almost entirely excluded self-
help, and it was only permitted where the State could not, or from public
policy would not, interfere. Feud could only be resorted to in ordinary cases
upon the failure of the wrongdoer or his kindred to pay the fine. Public policy
still allowed self-help in the case of a man caught in the act of adultery with
one's mother, wife, sister, or daughter, and in the case of the thief caught in
the act and resisting seizure." (Barrel!, An Outline of Anglo-Saxon Law, Page
72.) --- ED.
(4) Likewise, if anyone beats a stolen slave with a scourge, he will be liable
to two actions; that of theft and that of injury sustained ; and if he should
kill him, he will be liable to three actions.
(5) Again, if anyone has stolen a female slave belonging to another, and
debauched her, he will be liable to two actions; for he can be sued for having
corrupted the slave, as well as for having stolen her.
(6) Moreover, if anyone should wound a slave whom he has stolen, there will be
ground for two actions against him; that authorized by the Aquilian Law, and
the action of theft.
3. The Same, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book II.
Where anyone desires to bring an action based on a criminal offence, and
intends to do so for his own pecuniary benefit, he must have recourse to the
ordinary proceeding, and cannot be compelled to prosecute the culprit for the
crime. If, however, he wishes to sue for the penalty under the extraordinary
proceeding, he must then sign the accusation of the crime.
TITLE II. CONCERNING THEFTS.
1. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXIX.
Labeo says that the word "theft" is derived from the term meaning black,
because the offence is committed secretly, and in obscurity, and generally at
night; or from the word "fraud," as Sabinus held; or from the verbs to take,
and to carry away; or from the Greek term which designates thieves as
^wpas.And, indeed, the Greeks themselves derived the word from the verb to
carry away.
(1) Hence the sole intention of committing a theft does not make a thief.1
(2) Thus, anyone who denies that a deposit has been made with him does not
immediately become liable to an action for theft, but only when he has hidden
the property with the intention of appropriating it.
(3) A theft is the fraudulent handling of anything with the intention of
profiting by it; which applies either to the article itself or to its use or
possession, when this is prohibited by natural law.
2. Gaius, On the Edict, Book XIII.
There are two kinds of theft: manifest and non-manifest.
3. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLI.
Amanifest thief is one whom the Greeks call ORAVXXXXCRPA; that is to say, one
who is caught with the stolen goods.

[{ 1 Still, in the commission of every offence the intention, not the consequence of the act, was to be considered: "Voluntas in delictis noln exitus spectatur." --- ED. }]

(1) It makes little difference by whom he is caught, whether by one to whom the
property belongs, or by another.
(2) But is he a manifest thief only when he is caught in the act, or when he is
caught somewhere else? The better opinion is, as Julianus also says, that even
if he is not caught where he committed the crime, he is, nevertheless, a
manifest thief if he is seized with the stolen property before he has conveyed
it to the place where he intended to take it.
4. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IX.
The place where anyone intends to take stolen property should be understood to
mean where he expected to remain that day with the proceeds of the theft.
5. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLI.
Therefore, if he is arrested in a public or a private place, before he has
transported the stolen property to the destination which he had in view, he is
considered a manifest thief; provided he is taken with the stolen article in
his possession. This was also stated by Cassius.
(1) If, however, he has carried the stolen property to the place where he
intended to take it, even if he is seized with it in his possession, he is not
a manifest thief.
6. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IX.
For although theft is often committed by merely handling an .object, still, in
the beginning, that is to say, when the theft was committed, is the time which
has been established to determine whether or not the culprit is a manifest
thief.
7. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLI.
If anyone in servitude commits a theft, and is caught after having been
manumitted, let us see whether he is a manifest thief. Pomponius, in the
Nineteenth Book on Sabinus, says that he cannot be prosecuted as a manifest
thief, because the origin of a theft committed while in slavery was not that of
manifest theft.
(1) Pomponius very properly says, in the same place, that the thief does not
become a manifest one unless he is caught. Moreover, if I commit a theft by
taking something from your house, and you have concealed yourself to prevent me
from killing you, even if you saw me commit the theft, still, it is not a
manifest one.
(2) Celsus, however, adds to the result of detection, that if you have seen the
thief in the act of stealing, and you run forward to arrest him, and he takes
to flight, he is a manifest thief.
(3) He thinks it makes very little difference whether the owner of the
property, a neighbor, or any passer-by, catches a thief.
8. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XIII.
What a non-manifest theft is readily becomes apparent; for what is not manifest
for this very reason is non-manifest.
9. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book VI.
A person who can bring an action of theft is not entitled to any further
proceeding based on the constant handling of the articles taken by the thief,
even to recover any accession which may accrue to the property after it has
been stolen.
(1) If I should bring suit to recover the property from the thief, I will still
be entitled to a personal action.
It may, however, be said that it is the duty of the judge who has jurisdiction
of the case, not to order the restitution of the property, unless the plaintiff
dismisses the personal action.
If, however, the defendant, after having had judgment rendered against him in
the personal action, pays the damages assessed, so that he is absolutely
discharged from liability; or (which is the better opinion) if the plaintiff is
ready to return the damages, and the slave is not given up to him, the
possessor should have judgment rendered against him for the amount sworn to by
the other party in court.
10. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXIX.
He who was interested in not having the property stolen is entitled to an
action for theft.
11. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IX.
The party in interest is entitled to the action for theft if the case is an
honorable one.
12. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXIX.
Therefore, a fuller who has received clothing for the purpose of mending and
cleaning it has always a right of action, as he is responsible for its safe-
keeping. If, however, he is not solvent, the owner of the property can bring
suit, for he who has nothing to lose sustains no risk.
(1) The action of theft is not granted to a possessor in bad faith  --- although he
is interested in not having the property stolen --- for the reason that it is at
his risk. No one can acquire a right of action based upon dishonesty, and
therefore the action of theft is only granted to a bona fidepossessor, and not
to one who holds the property in bad faith.
(2) If the stolen article has been given in pledge, we also grant an action for
theft to the creditor, although it does not constitute part of his property.
Further, not only do we grant the action of theft against a stranger, but also
against the owner of the property himself; as Julianus stated. It is
established that it also is granted to the owner, and, consequently, he is not
liable to the action for theft, but he can bring it. It is granted to both
parties, because both are interested; but is the creditor always interested, or
is this only the case when the debtor is insolvent? Pomponius thinks that it is
always to his interest to have the pledge, which opinion Papinianus adopts in
the Twelfth Book of Questions. It is better to say
that this appears at all times to be the interest of the creditor; and this was
frequently stated by Julianus.
13. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book V.
Aperson to whom property is due under the terms of a stipulation is not
entitled to an action for theft if it should be stolen, even though the debtor
may be to blame for not having delivered it to him.
14. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXIX.
Where property which has been bought is not delivered to the person who
purchased it, Celsus says that he will not be entitled to an action for theft,
but that the vendor can bring this action. It will certainly be necessary for
him to direct the purchaser to bring the action for theft, as well as the
personal action, and the one to recover the property, and if anything is
obtained by means of these proceedings, he must deliver it to the purchaser;
which opinion is correct, and is accepted by Julianus. It is clear that the
risk of the property must be assumed by the purchaser, provided the vendor had
charge of it before he delivered it.
(1) Moreover, the purchaser is not entitled to an action for theft before
delivery, and the question has been asked whether the purchaser himself, if he
should steal the property, is liable to an action for theft? Julianus, in the
Twenty-third Book of the Digest, says that if a purchaser, after having paid
the price of the property, steals it, and the vendor has guaranteed its safe-
keeping, he will not be liable to an action for theft. It is clear, however,
that if he should steal the property before paying the money, he will be liable
to an action for theft, just as if he had stolen a pledge.
(2) Again, tenants on land, although they are not the owners of the property,
but because they have an interest in it, can bring an action of theft.
(3) Let us next examine whether the person with whom the property was deposited
is entitled to an action for theft. As he gives a guarantee against fraud, it
is held with reason that he is not entitled to an action for theft; for what
interest has he if he has not been guilty of fraud? If he has acted
fraudulently, the property is at his risk, but he ought not to ask for an
action for theft on the ground that he has been guilty of fraud.
(4) Julianus, in the Twenty-second Book of the Digest, also says that, because
it has been settled with reference to all thieves, that they cannot bring an
action for theft on account of the property which they themselves have stolen;
neither can he, with whom property has been deposited, bring an action for
theft, although he has begun to be responsible for the property, if he has
handled it with the intention of stealing it.
(5) Papinianus discusses the point that if I should receive two slaves in
pledge for ten aurei,and one of them should be stolen, and the other that was
left was not worth less than ten aurei,whether I will only be entitled to an
action for theft to the amount of five aurei,
for the reason that I am sure of the other five in the person of the remaining
slave; or, indeed, because the latter may die, it should be held that I am
entitled to an action for ten, even if the remaining slave is of great value. I
incline to the latter opinion, for we should not consider the pledge which was
not taken, but the one which was stolen.
(6) He also said that if ten aureiare due me, and a slave given in pledge for
them has been stolen, and I have recovered ten aureiby an action for theft, I
will not be entitled to another action for theft if the slave should be stolen
a second time, because I have ceased to have an interest when I have once
obtained that which was due me. This is the case where the theft was committed
without any fault of mine, for if I was to blame, as I had an interest because
I would be liable in an action on pledge, I can bring the action for theft.
If, however, I was not to blame, it appears that there is no doubt that an
action will lie in favor of the owner of the property, which will not be
granted to the creditor.
This opinion Pomponius approves in the Tenth Book on Sabinus.
(7) The same authorities assert that if two slaves are stolen at the same time,
the creditor will be entitled to an action for theft on account of both of
them; not for the entire sum, but to the extent of his interest estimated by
dividing the amount which is due to him with reference to each of the slaves.
If, however, the two slaves should be stolen separately, and the creditor has
collected the entire amount on account of one of them, he can recover nothing
on account of the other.
(8) Pomponius, in the Tenth Book on Sabinus, also says that if he to whom I
have lent something for use, commits fraud with reference to the property
loaned, he cannot bring the action for theft.
(9) Pomponius holds the same opinion with reference to a person who, by the
direction of someone, has received the property for transportation.
(10) The question arises whether a father is entitled to an action for theft
when property has been lent for use to his son. Julianus says that a father
cannot bring the action under these circumstances, because he should not be
responsible for the safe-keeping of the property; just as he says that anyone
who becomes surety for someone to whom property is loaned for use is not
entitled to an action for theft. For he holds that not everyone, without
distinction, to whose interest it is that the property should not be lost, is
entitled to an action for theft; but only he who is liable because it was his
fault that the same property has been destroyed. Celsus, also, approves this
opinion in the Twelfth Book of the Digest.
(11) Is a man who has acquired a slave by a precarious tenure entitled to an
action for theft if the slave is stolen, is a question which may be asked. And,
as a civil suit cannot be brought against him, because property held by a
precarious tenure resembles a donation, and therefore an interdict appears to
be necessary, he will have no right to an action for theft. I think, after an
interdict has been
granted, it is clear that he ought to offer a guarantee against negligence, and
hence he can bring an action for theft.
(12) Where anyone has leased property, he will be entitled to an action for
theft, provided it was stolen through his negligence.
(13) Where a son under paternal control is stolen, it is evident that his
father can bring an action for theft.1
(14) If property should be loaned for use, and he to whom it was loaned should
die, although theft cannot be committed against an estate, and therefore the
heir of the person to whom the article was lent cannot institute proceedings,
still, the lender can bring the action for theft.
The same rule applies to property which has been pledged or hired, for although
the action for theft is not acquired by an estate, still it is acquired by the
parties interested in the same.
(15) The action for theft not only lies in favor of him to whom the property
was lent, on account of said property, but also on account of anything
connected with it, because he was responsible for its safe-keeping. For if I
lend you a slave for use, you can bring an action for stealing his clothing,
although I did not lend you the garments which he wore. Likewise, if I lend you
beasts of burden, and a colt is following one of them, I think that an action
for theft will lie for stealing the colt, although it was not included in the
loan.
(16) The question arose, what then is the nature of the action for theft which
is granted to the person to whom property was lent for use? I think that
actions for theft will lie in favor of all those who are responsible for the
property of others, whether it is lent for use, leased, or pledged, provided it
is stolen; but a personal action will only lie in favor of him who is the
owner.
(17) If a letter which I have sent to you should be intercepted, who will have
a right to bring the action for theft? And, in the first place, it must be
ascertained to whom the letter belonged, whether to the person who sent it, or
to him to whom it was despatched. If I gave it to a slave of him to whom it was
sent, it was immediately acquired by the latter. If I gave it to his agent,
this is also the case, because, as possession can be acquired by means of a
free person, the letter immediately became his property; and this is especially
true if he was interested in having it. If, however, I sent a letter which was
to be returned to me, it will remain mine, because I was unwilling to
relinquish or transfer the ownership of it.
Who then can bring the action for theft? He can do so who is interested in not
having the letter stolen, that is to say, the individual who was benefited by
what it contained. Therefore, it may be asked
1 This is a survival of the ancient Roman doctrine incident to the patria
potestas,that a child was the absolute property of its father, a mere chattel,
to be disposed of with as little ceremony as a horse or a slave. Its survival
in times comparatively modern, indicates not only the jealousy with which the
patriarchal right of the parent was regarded, but the unnatural harshness with
which this privilege might legally be exercised. The fact that its abuse was,
to a certain extent, restricted, affords no valid reason for its continuance
during the ages of Italian culture and civilization. --- ED.
whether he, also, can bring the action for theft to whom the letter was given
in order to be conveyed to its destination. He can do so if he was responsible
for the safe-keeping of the letter, and if it was to his interest to deliver it
he will be entitled to an action for theft. Suppose that the letter stated that
something should be delivered to him, or done for him; he can then bring an
action for theft, if he assumed responsibility for its delivery, or received a
reward for carrying it. In this instance, he resembles an inn-keeper, or the
master of a ship; for we grant them an action for theft, if they are solvent,
as they are responsible for property.
15. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book V.
A creditor, whose pledge has been stolen, has an interest not merely to the
extent of his claim, but he can bring an action of theft for the entire value
of the property stolen, but he must return to the debtor all in excess of his
debt which can be recovered in an action on pledge.
(1) The owner of the property who has stolen something of which another enjoys
the usufruct is liable to the usufructuary in an action for theft.
(2) If anyone who has lent you an article for use should steal it; Pomponius
says that he will not be liable in an action for theft, as you have no interest
in the matter, for an action based on the loan of the property cannot be
brought against you; hence, if you have retained the article on account of some
expense which you have incurred with reference to it, you will be entitled to
an action for theft, even against the owner himself, if he should steal it,
because, in this instance, the property takes the place of a pledge.
16. The Same, On Sabinus, Book VII.
It is not a rule of law that a father cannot bring an action for theft against
his son, who is under his control, but it presents an obstacle from the nature
of the case; because we cannot bring suit against those who are under your
control, any more than they can bring suit against us.
17. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXIX.
Our slaves and our children can, indeed, steal from us, but they will not be
liable to an action for theft; as he who can decide the case of a thief has no
need to bring suit against him. Therefore, no action was granted to him by the
ancient legislators.
(1) Hence the question arose, if a slave was either alienated or manumitted,
whether he would be liable to an action for theft. It was decided that he is
not liable, for a cause of action which does not exist in the beginning cannot
afterwards arise against a thief of this kind. It is, however, clear that if,
after having been manumitted, he should appropriate any property, he can be
said to be liable to such an action, because he then commits a veritable theft.
(2) When, however, a slave whom I purchased, and who was delivered to me, is
returned to me under a conditional clause of the sale, he should not be
considered as ever having belonged to me, but he has been mine, and has ceased
to be such. Therefore Sabinus says that, if he commits a theft, his position is
such that the person who returned him will not be entitled to an action for
theft. But although he cannot bring such an action, still, when he is sent
back, the value of the property stolen should be estimated and included in the
action for his return.
(3) If a fugitive slave should steal from his master, the question was asked
whether the latter could also bring an action against the person who had bona
fidepossession of him before he was restored to the power of his master. This
point gives rise to some difficulty; for although I may be considered to have
had possession of the slave during the time in which he was a fugitive, still I
will not be liable to an action for theft, as he was not under my control. For
Julianus says that when I seemed to possess him, this was of no advantage
except to enable me to acquire him by usucaption. Therefore Pomponius, in the
Seventeenth Book on Sabinus, says that the action for theft will lie in favor
of the owner whose slave was in flight.
18. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IX.
When it is said that the injury follows the person, this is true to the extent
that the right of action follows him who commits the damage, where it arises
against anyone in the beginning. Hence, if your slave steals something from me,
and, having become his owner, I sell him, the Cassians hold that I cannot bring
an action against the debtor.
19. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XL.
In an action for theft, it is sufficient for the property to be described in
such a way that it can be understood what it is.
(1) It is not necessary to mention the weight of vessels, therefore it will be
sufficient to say a dish, a plate, or a bowl. The material of which the article
is composed must, however, be stated; that is, whether it is of silver, or
gold, or anything else.
(2) Where anyone brings suit for unmanufactured silver, he should say an ingot
of silver, and give its weight.
(3) The number of coins which have been stolen from the owner must be included,
for instance, so many aurei,or more.
(4) The question arises whether the color of a garment should be mentioned. It
is true that this should be done, for, just as where a theft of plate is
involved, a golden bowl is mentioned, so, where a garment is concerned, the
color should be stated. It is clear that if anyone should swear that he cannot
positively designate the color, the necessity of the case should excuse him.
(5) Where anyone gives property in pledge, and then steals it, he will be
liable in an action for theft.
(6) The owner is not only considered as guilty of the theft of property which
has been pledged, when he takes it from the creditor who possesses or holds it,
but also if he should remove it at a time when he did not possess it; for
instance, if he should sell the article which had been pledged; for it is
settled that, under such circumstances, he commits theft. Julianus, also, is of
this opinion.
20. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IX.
Where brass is given in pledge, and it is stated to be gold, a dishonorable
act, but not a theft, is committed. If gold is pledged, and afterwards, under
the pretext of weighing, or sealing it, brass is substituted for the gold, the
person who does so commits a theft, for he has appropriated property given in
pledge.
(1) If you purchase my property in good faith, and I steal it from you, or even
if you are entitled to the usufruct thereof, and I put it aside with the
intention of appropriating it, I will be liable to you in an action for theft,
notwithstanding I am the owner of the property. In these cases, however,
usucaption will not be prevented, as where it is stolen; for, if another had
stolen it, and the property should again come under my control, usucaption will
continue to run.
21. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XL.
The following question frequently arises, namely: where anyone removes a
measure of grain from a heap, whether he steals the whole of it or only the
amount which he appropriates. Ofilius thinks that he steals the entire heap,
for Trebatius says that a person who touches the ear of anyone is considered to
have touched him all over; hence, if anyone opens a cask, and takes out a
little wine, he is understood to have stolen not merely what he removed, but
all of it. It is, however, true that, under these circumstances, he is only
liable in an action for theft for the amount which he carried away. For if
anyone opens a closet, which he cannot remove, puts aside everything it
contains, and then departs; and afterwards, having returned, removes one of the
articles, and is caught before he reaches his destination, he will be guilty of
both manifest and a non-manifest theft of the same property. For he who, in the
daytime, cuts down growing grain, and puts it aside with the intention of
removing it, is both a manifest and a non-manifest thief, so far as what he has
cut is concerned.
(1) If anyone, who has deposited a bag of twenty sesterces,should receive
another bag in which he knows there are thirty, through the mistake of the
person who gave it to him, who thought that his twenty were contained therein,
it is decided that he will be liable for the theft of ten sesterces.
(2) Where anyone steals brass, when he thinks he is stealing gold, or vice
versa,or he thinks that the value of the article is less, when it is more, he
commits a theft of what he removed, according to the Eighth Book of Pomponius
on Sabinus. Ulpianus is of the same opinion.
(3) If, however, anyone steals two bags, one of ten, and the other of twenty
aurei,one of which he thought belonged to him, and the other he knew to belong
to someone else, we say that he only steals the bag which he believed belonged
to another, just as if he should steal two cups, one of which he thought was
his own, and the other he knew belonged to someone else, for he only steals one
of them.
(4) But where he thinks that the handle of a cup belongs to him, and it
actually is his, Pomponius says that he is guilty of stealing the entire cup.
(5) If, however, anyone should steal the sixth part of a measure of wheat from
a loaded ship, does he commit a theft of the entire load, or only of the sixth
part of the measure of wheat? This question is more applicable to a granary,
which is full, and it is very severe to hold that a theft of all of it is
committed. And what would be the rule in the case of a reservoir of wine, or a
cistern of water, or what in that of a ship loaded with wine, as there are many
of these in which wine is poured? And what shall we say of him who has drunk of
the wine; is he to be considered to have stolen all of it ?
The better opinion is that we should say that he has not stolen it all.
(6) If you suppose two jars of wine to be placed in a warehouse, and that one
of them is stolen, the theft has reference to that one, and not to the entire
warehouse; just as where one of several portable articles in a granary is
removed.
(7) A person who enters a room with the intention of committing a theft is not
a thief, although he may have entered for that purpose. What, then, is the
rule? To what action will he be liable? He can be accused of committing damage
or violence, if he entered by force.
(8) Likewise, if he opened or broke anything of great weight, which he was not
able to remove, an action for theft for the entire amount cannot be brought
against him, but only for what he took away, because he was unable to take it
all. Hence, if he removed a cover which he could not take away, in order to
obtain access to certain articles, and then appropriated some of them, although
he may have been able to remove the objects therein contained separately, but
could not take the entire contents together; he is only considered to have
stolen the thing which he removed, and not the others.
If he was able to remove the entire receptacle, we say that he steals the whole
of it, although he may have detached the cover in order to take some, or a
certain number of the articles therein contained. This was also the opinion of
Sabinus.
(9) If two or more persons should steal a beam, which any one of them alone is
unable to lift, it must be said that all of them are guilty of stealing it,
although none of them singly could have handled or removed it, and this is our
practice. For it cannot be held that each one committed a theft proportionally,
but that all of them stole the whole of it. Hence it results that each of them
will be liable for theft.
(10) And although a person may be liable in an action of theft for property
which he did not remove, still, a personal action cannot be brought against
him, because such a proceeding will not lie to recover property which has been
carried away. This was also the opinion of Pomponius.
22. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IX.
Where a thief breaks or destroys anything, which he did not handle for the
purpose of stealing it, an action of theft cannot be brought against him on
this account.
(1) If, for instance, a chest should be broken into with the intention of
stealing pearls, and they were handled with this dishonest purpose, it seems
that the culprit had intended to steal them alone; which is correct. For the
other articles which were displaced in order to reach the pearls were not
handled for the purpose of stealing them.
(2) Anyone who scrapes a silver dish is a thief of all of it, and he is liable
to an action for theft to the extent of the owner's interest.
23. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLI.
Achild under the age of puberty can commit a theft if he is capable of crime,
as Julianus states in the Twenty-second Book of the Digest. Likewise, an action
for injury sustained can be brought against a child under the age of puberty,
because the theft was committed by him; but this admits of a modification, for
we do not think that the action under the Aquilian Law which can be brought
against a child under the age of puberty, who is capable of guilt, is
applicable to infants. What Labeo says is also true, that is, where theft has
been committed with the aid of a child under the age of puberty, it will not be
liable.1
1 Under the English Law, from very early times, the age of criminal
responsibility has been held to be largely dependent upon the circumstances of
each particular case, and the ability of the accused to discriminate between
right and wrong. A distinction was also made between the degrees of care to be
employed in the examination of minors for the perpetration of crimes or
misdemeanors, as the more serious the offence, the closer the scrutiny; great
indulgence being always shown to nonage, which, of itself, implies a deficiency
of intellect calling for the exercise of leniency.
The Saxons fixed the age of liability at twelve years, a rule which was
followed by the old English authorities. "The laws of England, therefore, that
always affect certainty, determined anciently the sstas pubertati proximato be
twelve years for both sexes; under that age none could be regularly guilty of a
capital offense, and above that age and under fourteen years, he might or might
not be guilty according to the circumstances of the fact that might induce the
court and jury to judge him doli capax, vel incapax."(Hale, History of the
Pleas of the Crown, I, III, Page 22.)
The laws of Wales prohibited the indictment of a youth of fourteen without his
father. (The Ancient Laws of Cambria, Page 52.)
The present English rule absolutely excludes from criminal liability all
children under the age of seven, and requires proof that they are doli
capacesfrom seven to fourteen. "No act done by any person under seven years of
age is a crime." "No act done by any person over seven and under fourteen years
of age is a
24. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IX.
Julianus says that a personal action for recovery cannot be brought against
him.
25. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLI.
The rule adopted by most authorities, that the theft of a tract of land cannot
be committed, is true.
(1) Hence, the question arises, if anyone is ejected from land, can a personal
action for its recovery be brought against him who ejected him? Labeo denies
that it can. But Celsus thinks that a personal action can be brought to recover
possession, just as when movable property is stolen.
(2) There is no doubt that an action of theft can be brought where anything is
removed from land, for example, trees, stones, sand, or fruits, which someone
has taken with the intention of stealing them.
26. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IX.
If wild bees swarm upon a tree of your land, and anyone removes either the bees
or their honey, he will not be liable for theft to you, because they were not
yours, and it is established that they are included among those things which
can be seized on land or sea, or in the air.
(1) It is also settled that a tenant who pays rent in money can bring an action
for theft against anyone who steals his standing crops, because they would have
begun to belong to him as soon as he had gathered them.
27. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLI.
Anyone who appropriates account-books, or written instruments, is liable for
theft, not only for the value of the account-books, but
crime, unless it be shown affirmatively that such person had sufficient
capacity to know that the act was wrong." (Stephen, A Digest of the Criminal
Law, I, III.)
The American Law corresponds with that of England. A child under seven cannot
be judicially punished. Conviction of one between seven and fourteen may take
place, if it is proved to be doli capax.(Wharton, A Treatise on Criminal Law,
I, 85, 86.) In both England and the United States, the maxim Malitia supplet
tetatemis applicable to nearly all felonies.
The French Code provides that a minor under eighteen years of age, when accused
of a crime, shall be acquitted, if he is proved to have "acted without
discernment." (Code Penal de France,Art. 66.) In Belgium, the prescribed age is
sixteen years. (Code des Lois Pennies Beiges,Art. 72.) The limit of criminal
irresponsibility in Spain and Italy is nine years (Codigo Penal de Espana,Art.
8, Codice Penale del Regna d'ltalia,Art. 53); in Portugal, it is from nine to
ten years (Codigo Penal Portuguez,Art. 48) ; in Germany, twelve
(Strafgesetzbuch fur das Deutsche Reich,Art. 55) ; in Austria and Japan,
fourteen (Allgemeines Straf-gesetz,Art. 2, Criminal Code of Japan, Art. 51) ;
in Holland, sixteen (Wetboek van Strafrecht,Art. 38) ; in Denmark, ten
(Almindelig burgerlig Straffelov,Sec. 85) ; and in Sweden, fifteen (Sveriges
Rikes Lag,5 Kap.Sec. 1). In many of the Codes above mentioned the minor may, in
the discretion of the court, be placed under restraint or in a reformatory,
until he becomes of legal age. --- ED.
also for the interest which the owner had in them, which has reference to the
estimate of the sums included in the accounts, that is to say, if they amounted
to that much money; for instance, if they contained an account of ten aurei,we
say that this sum should be doubled.
If, however, no claims were entered in the accounts because they had been paid,
should not the estimate of the value of the account-books themselves only be
considered? For what other interest could the owner have in them? It may be
held that, because sometimes debtors desire the accounts to be returned to
them, as they say that they have paid sums which are not due, it is to the
interest of the creditor to hold the accounts, in order that no controversy may
arise respecting them. And, generally speaking, it should be said that double
the value of the interest involved is asked in cases of this kind.
(1) Hence, where anyone who has other proofs and bank-registers has had a note
stolen from him, it may be asked whether double the amount of the note should
be estimated, or whether this should not be done on the ground that he has no
interest in it. For what interest can he have when the debt can be proved in
some other way; for instance, if it is included in two different accounts. For
the creditor is not considered to have lost anything, if there happens to be
another evidence of the debt which renders him secure.
(2) Likewise, when a receipt is stolen, it must also be said that there will be
ground for an action of theft to the extent of the owner's interest. It seems
to me, however, that he has no interest in it, if other evidence exists to show
that the money has been paid.
(3) If, however, the offender did not remove documents of this kind, but erased
portions of them, there will not only be ground for an action of theft, but
also for procedure under the Aquilian Law, for anyone who has defaced property
is held to have "broken it."
28. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IX.
If, however, he should steal something, he will only be liable for the interest
which the owner had in not having the article stolen, for, by defacing it, he
adds nothing to the penalty.
29. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLI.
Moreover, an action for the production of the property can be brought, as well
as an interdict for the possession of the same i1
1 The interdict Quorum bonorumwas employed to compel the surrender of personal
property forming part of an estate from whomsoever was in possession of the
same at the time, either as occupant, or heir; and was issued in favor of the
plaintiff under the provisions of the Praetorian Edict. A difference existed
between this proceeding and the suit for the estate, or Petitio hereditatis;as,
by the former, merely possession was demanded; while the latter involved the
title to the estate, the petition of the plaintiff setting forth that it was
his by hereditary right, and asking that it be adjudged to him as heir, in
accordance with his claim.
This interdict, while restitutory, was not available for the recovery of choses
in action; it was a summary proceeding, and gave the applicant possession
without delay, and could not be used to obtain separate articles, but was only
applicable to the corporeal property of the estate in its entirety. --- ED.
30. The Same, On Sabinus, Book IX.If the will has been mutilated.
31. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XLI.
Where, however, anyone defaces a picture or a book, he will be liable to an
action for wrongful damage, just as if he had destroyed the article.
(1) If anyone steals, or makes erasures in the registers of the acts of the
Republic, or of any municipality, Labeo asserts that he will be liable for an
action of theft. He says the same thing with reference to other public
property, or that belonging to associations.
32. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IX.
Some authorities think that, in an action for theft, an estimate of the
accounts should only be made, for the reason that if the amount of the debt can
be proved before a judge having jurisdiction of an action of theft, it can also
be proved before one having jurisdiction of a suit brought for the collection
of the money.
If, however, it cannot be established before the judge having jurisdiction of
the action for theft, the amount of the damage sustained cannot be shown.
Still, it might happen that, after the theft has been committed, the plaintiff
could recover the accounts, so that he can prove how much damage he would have
sustained if he had not recovered them.
(1) The principal question with reference to the Aquilian Law is, how can the
value of the party's interest be established? For if it can be proved in any
other way, he does not sustain any damage. What then is the rule, if he should
happen to lend money under a condition, and, in the meantime, the witnesses on
whom he relies for proof die before the condition is fulfilled? Or, suppose I
have demanded a sum of money, which I lent, and because I do not produce the
witnesses who signed the agreement, I lose my case; if I bring an action for
theft, I can make use of their memory and their presence to prove that I lent
the money.
33. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLI.
A guardian, while entitled to the administration of the affairs of his ward,
has no power to appropriate his property. Therefore, if he removes anything
belonging to the latter with the intention of stealing it, he commits a theft,
and the property cannot be acquired by usucaption; but he will be liable to an
action for theft, although one on guardianship can also be brought against him.
What has been said with reference to a guardian also applies to the curator of
a minor, as well as to other curators.
34. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IX.
Anyone who assists a thief is not always himself a manifest thief; hence it
happens that he who furnished assistance is liable for non-manifest theft, and
he who was caught in the act is guilty of manifest theft of the same property.
35. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XIX.
If anyone should receive an article for the purpose of transporting it, knowing
it to have been stolen, it is established that if he is arrested with it in his
possession, he alone is the manifest thief, but if he was not aware that it had
been stolen, neither of the parties is a manifest thief; the latter because he
is not a thief, and the thief himself, because he was not arrested with the
goods in his possession.
(1) If one of your slaves has drunk and carried away wine, and another has been
caught drinking the wine, you will hold the former liable for non-manifest
theft, and the latter for manifest theft.
36. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLI.
Anyone who persuades a slave to take to flight is not a thief; for he who gives
another bad advice does not commit theft, any more than if he persuaded him to
throw himself down from some height, or to lay violent hands upon himself; for
things of this kind do not admit of an action of theft. If, however, he should
persuade him to run away in order that he may be stolen by someone else, he
will be liable for theft, because the crime was committed with his assistance
and advice.
Pomponius goes still further, and says that the person who persuades him, even
though in the meantime he is not liable for theft, he, nevertheless, begins to
be liable at the time that anyone steals the fugitive slave, as the theft is
considered to have been committed with his assistance and advice.
(1) It has also been decided that anyone who assists his son, or a slave, or
his wife, to commit a theft, is liable for theft; although they themselves
cannot have an action of theft brought against them.
(2) Pomponius also says that when a fugitive slave takes property with him, he
who has induced him to do so can have an action for theft brought against him,
on account of the stolen property; because he contributed his assistance and
advice to the thief. This also is stated by Sabinus.
(3) If two slaves take the advice of one another, and both run away at the same
time, one is not the thief of the other. But what if they should conceal one
another? It may happen that they are both thieves of one another. It can also
be said that one is the thief of the other, for, where other persons steal each
of them, they will be liable as having given mutual assistance; just as Sabinus
has stated that they are also liable for stealing the property which they have
carried away.
37. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XIX.
If you follow a tame peacock which has escaped from my house until he is lost,
I can bring an action for theft against you, as soon as anyone seizes it.
38. Paulus.
If a son under paternal control is stolen, it is clear that his father will be
entitled to an action for theft.
39. The Same, On Sabinus, Book IX.
A mother whose son has been stolen is not entitled to an action for theft.
(1) Although an action for theft can be brought on account of free persons, a
personal action for recovery will still never lie.
40. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLI.
It is true that if anyone has carried away a female slave, who is a harlot, and
belongs to another, or has concealed her, this will not be a theft; for not the
act, but the motive for committing it should be considered. The motive for
committing this act was lust, ancl not theft. Therefore, even a person who has
broken down the door of a harlot for the purpose of having intercourse with her
will not be liable for theft, where thieves were not introduced by him; even
though having entered, they may have carried away the woman's property.
But is anyone who has concealed a female slave for the purpose of enjoying her
liable under the Favian Law? I do not think that he is, and an instance of this
kind having been presented to me, I gave this opinion: for the person who stole
the woman commits a more dishonorable act, and he pays for its disgrace, but he
certainly is not a thief.
41. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IX.
Anyone who takes beasts of burden to a greater distance than was agreed upon
when they were lent to him, or who makes use of property belonging to another
against the consent of the owner, commits a theft.
42. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLI.
When anyone, while in the hands of the enemy, has something stolen from him,
and returns by the right of postliminium,it may be said that he is entitled to
an action for theft.
(1) It is certain that an arrogator can bring an action for theft, even if the
property has been stolen from the person whom he arrogated before this was
done. If the theft was committed afterwards, there is no doubt that he can
bring the action.
(2) The action for theft is not extinguished as long as the thief lives,
whether he who perpetrates the offence is his own master when an action is
brought against him, or whether he is under the control of another, and the
action for theft is brought against the person to whose authority he is
subjected; and this is the reason that it is said that the crime follows the
person.
(3) If anyone, after having committed damage, should become the slave of the
enemy, let us see whether the action will be extinguished. Pomponius says that
it will be extinguished, and if the captive returns by the law of
postliminium,or by any other right whatsoever, the action will be revived; and
this is our practice.
43. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IX.
If a slave should assume command of a ship without the consent of his master,
the common rule should be applied against the latter for anything which is lost
in the ship; so that what the slave is responsible for may be taken out of his
peculium,and any negligence of the owner himself must in addition be atoned for
by a noxal action. Therefore, if the slave should be manumitted, the right to
bring the action De peculiowill continue to exist against a master for a year,
but the noxal action will follow him.
(1) Sometimes both the manumitted slave and the person who gave him his freedom
are liable for theft, if the latter manumitted the slave in order to prevent an
action for theft from being brought against -him. When, however, the master is
sued, Sabinus says that the manumitted slave is released by operation of law,
just as if it had been decided that this should be the case.
44. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLI.
Where a false creditor (that is to say, one who pretends to be a creditor)
receives anything, he commits a theft, and the money paid does not become his
property.
(1) A false agent is also considered to commit a theft. Neratius, however, says
that it should be considered whether this opinion, which is susceptible of
different constructions, is correct. For when a debtor pays an agent money with
the intention that it shall be delivered to his creditor, and the agent
appropriates it, the above-mentioned opinion is correct, as the money continues
to belong to the debtor when the agent did not receive it in the name of him to
whom the debtor desired it to be paid, and by retaining it without the consent
of his principal, he undoubtedly commits a theft.
If, however, the debtor should pay the money in order that it may become the
property of the agent, Neratius says that the latter by no means commits a
theft, as he receives the money with the consent of his principal.
(2) Where anyone receives something which is not due, and delegates another to
whom payment should be made, an action for theft will not lie; provided payment
is made during the absence of the person above mentioned. If, however, he is
present, the case is different, and he commits a theft.
(3) If someone has not made a false statement with reference to himself
personally, but is guilty of fraud in his assertions, he is rather deceitful
than guilty of theft; for example, if he says he is rich, and will invest what
he has received in merchandise; that he will give solvent sureties; or that he
will immediately make payment; for in all these instances, he is rather guilty
of deception than of theft, and therefore he will not be liable for theft; but
because he has committed fraud, if no other action can be brought against him,
one for
fraud will lie.
(4) Where anyone, with the intention of stealing it, removes the property of
another, which he had left lying exposed, he will be liable
for theft, whether he knew or did not know to whom the property belonged; for
it does not diminish the guilt of theft for a person to be ignorant who was the
owner of the property.
(5) If the owner has abandoned the property, I do not steal it, even if I have
the intention of doing so; for a theft is not perpetrated unless there is
someone from whom the article may be stolen. However, in the case where it is
not stolen from anyone, the opinion of Sabinus and Cassius, who held that
property immediately ceases to be ours as soon as we abandon it, has been
adopted.
(6) If the property has, in fact, not been abandoned, but he who takes it
thinks that it has, he will not be liable for theft.
(7) If the property has not been abandoned, and he does not think so, but takes
it lying as it were exposed, not to profit by it, but to return it to the
person to whom it belongs, he will not be liable for theft.
(8) Therefore, if he did not know to whom it belonged, and, nevertheless, took
it in order to return it to anyone who claimed it, or could prove that the
property was his, let us see whether he will be liable for theft. I do not
think that he will, for most persons do this with the intention of putting up a
notice announcing that they have found the property, and will return it to him
who claims it. Such persons show that they have not the intention of stealing.
(9) What should be done if he demands a reward for finding the property? This
is not considered to constitute a theft, although it is not very honorable for
him to demand anything.
(10) Where anyone voluntarily throws something away, or has thrown it away, but
not with the intention of considering it abandoned, and you remove it, Celsus,
in the Twelfth Book of the Digest, asks whether you are guilty of theft. And he
says that if you thought that the article was abandoned, you will not be
liable, but if you did not think so, a doubt may exist on this point; still he
maintains that you will not be liable, because he says the property has not
been taken from him who voluntarily threw it away.
(11) When anyone carries away property which has been thrown overboard from a
ship, is he guilty of theft? In this case, the question is whether the property
was considered to be abandoned. If he who threw it overboard did so with the
intention of abandoning it, which, in general, should be believed, as he knew
that it would be lost, he who finds it makes it his own, and is not guilty of
theft. When, however, he did not have this intention, but threw it overboard
for the purpose of keeping it, if it should be saved, he who finds it can be
deprived of it. If the latter was aware of this, and holds the property with
the intention of stealing it, he is guilty of theft; but where he retained it
with the intention of preserving it for the owner, he will not be liable for
theft. If, however, he thought that the property had simply been thrown
overboard, he will still not be liable for theft.
(12) Even if I should acquire only half of the ownership of a slave who had
previously stolen something from me, the better opin-
ion is that the right of action will be extinguished, when I have only obtained
the ownership of half of said slave; because, even in the beginning, a person
who had a half ownership in a slave could not bring an action for theft.
It is clear that, if my usufruct in the said slave begins to exist, it must be
said that the right of action for theft is not extinguished, because the
usufructuary is not the owner.
45. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XIX.
If, by order of a debtor, a false agent should receive money from another, a
debtor of the said debtor, he will be liable to the debtor for theft, and the
money will belong to the latter.
(1) If I deliver my property to you as yours, and you know that it is mine, the
better opinion is to hold that you are guilty of theft, if you did this with
the intention of profiting by it.
(2) If a slave belonging to an estate which has not yet been accepted, steals
something from the heir, and is manumitted by the will of his master, an action
for theft will lie against him, because the heir was at no time his master.
46. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLI.
Where a partner steals property owned in common (for a theft of partnership
property can be committed), it can be said without any doubt that an action for
theft will lie.
47. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XLII.
It has been decided by all authorities that an action for theft can be brought
against the thief, even if the stolen property has been destroyed. Hence, after
the death of a slave whom someone has stolen, the right of action for theft
remains unimpaired. Nor does manumission extinguish this right, for manumission
is not unlike death as it appears to remove the slave from the power of his
master. Therefore, no matter in what way the slave may be removed from the
control of his master, the action for theft can still be brought against the
thief; and this is our practice. This action lies, not because the slave is now
separated from his master, but because he is separated from him for the benefit
of the thief.
This rule has also been adopted with reference to a personal action for
recovery of the property; for it can be brought against a thief, even if the
property has been, for some reason or other, destroyed. This must also be said
where the property has fallen into the hands of the enemy, for it is
established that an action for theft can be brought on account of it. If,
however, after having been considered abandoned, it should be recovered by the
owner, he can still bring an action for theft.
(1) If a slave subject to an usufruct is stolen, both the usufruct-ua'ry and
the owner are entitled to an action for theft. The action is, therefore,
divided between the owner and the usufructuary, and the usufructuary brings
suit for the profits, .or for the amount of the
interest which he had in not having a theft committed, that is to say, for
double damages; and the owner brings an action for the interest he had in not
being deprived of his property.
(2) When we say double damages, we must understand this to mean that an action
for quadruple damages will lie, if the theft is manifest.
(3) This action may lie in favor of a person who is only entitled to the use of
said slave.
(4) If anyone should suppose that this slave has also been given in pledge, the
result will be that he, likewise, who received him by way of pledge, will be
entitled to the action for theft. Moreover, if the slave is worth more than the
amount due under the pledge, even the debtor can bring the action for theft.
(5) The actions which lie in favor of these persons are so different in their
nature that if anyone of them has released the thief from responsibility for
damages, it must be said that he has lost the right of action only for himself,
but that it continues to exist so far as the others are concerned. For if you
suppose that a slave owned in common has been stolen, and one of his masters
releases the thief from liability for damages, the other, who did not do so,
will be entitled to an action for theft.
(6) The owner can also bring the action for theft against the usufructuary, if
he has done anything for the purpose of concealing the property, or
appropriating it.
(7) It has been very properly held that he who thinks he has obtained
possession of property with the consent of the owner is not a thief. For how
can he be guilty of fraud who thinks that the owner will give his consent,
whether his opinion is false or true? Therefore, he alone is a thief who takes
something against the will of the owner and knows that he does so.
(8) On the other hand, if I think that I am doing something against the will of
the owner, and the latter should actually be willing, the question is asked
whether there will be ground for an action for theft. Pomponius says that I
commit a theft. However, it is true that if I am willing for him to make use of
the property, although he may not be aware of the fact, he will not be guilty
of theft.
(9) If the stolen property should be restored to the owner, and is taken a
second time, another action for theft will lie.
48. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IX.
If the ownership of the stolen property is changed in any way whatsoever, the
action for theft will lie in favor of the actual owner; as, for instance, in
favor of the heir and the praetorian possessor of the estate, as well as of an
adoptive father, and a legatee.
49. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLII.
A certain man lost a silver vase, and brought an action for theft, and when a
dispute arose as to the weight of the vase, and the plaintiff declared that it
was greater than it really was, the thief produced
the vase. He to whom it belonged took it away from the thief, and the latter,
nevertheless, had judgment rendered against him for double damages, which was
an exceedingly proper decision. For in the penal action not merely the property
itself which was stolen is included, whether the action for manifest theft, or
that for non-manifest theft is brought.
(1) Anyone who knows a thief is not one himself, whether he points him out or
does not do so, as a great difference exists between concealing a thief and not
pointing him out. He who knows him is not liable for theft, but he who conceals
him is responsible for doing so.
(2) He who takes a slave with the consent of his master is neither a thief nor
a kidnapper, as is perfectly evident. For who that acts in accordance with the
will of the owner of the property can be called a thief?
(3) If the master has forbidden it, and he takes the slave away, but not with
the intention of concealing him, he is not a thief; if he conceals him, he then
begins to be a thief. Therefore, anyone who takes a slave away, but does not
conceal him, is not a thief, even if he does this against the will of the
master. We understand, however, that the master forbids this being done, even
when he is not aware of the fact, that is to say, when he does not consent.
(4) If I give you a garment to be cleaned for a compensation, and you, without
my knowledge or consent, lend it to Titius, and Titius steals it, an action for
theft will also lie in your favor, because you are responsible for the safe-
keeping of the property; and I will be entitled to an action against you,
because you ought not to have lent it, and by doing so, you have committed a
theft. This is an instance in which a thief can bring an action for theft.
(5) Where a female slave, who is pregnant, is stolen or conceives while in the
hands of the thief, her child will be stolen property; whether it is born while
she is under the control of the thief, or while she is in the hands of a bona
fidepossessor. In the latter case, however, the action for theft will not lie.
But if she conceives while in the hands of a bona fidepossessor, and has a
child while there, the result will be that the child will not be stolen
property, but that it can even be obtained by usucaption.
The same rule should be observed with reference to cattle and their offspring,
as in the case of a child of a female slave.
(6) Colts born to stolen mares immediately belong to a bona fidepurchaser, and
this is reasonable, because they are included in the profits, but the child of
the female slave is not included therein.
(7) A thief sold stolen property, and the owner of the same extorted the money
paid for it from the thief. The opinion was properly given that he had
committed a theft of the money, and he will even be liable to the action for
property taken by violence; for no one has any doubt that what has been
acquired in exchange for stolen property is not itself stolen. Therefore, money
obtained as the price of stolen property is not stolen.
50. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book X.
It sometimes happens that he who has an interest in having the property
preserved is not entitled to the action for theft. For instance, a creditor
cannot bring suit for the theft of property belonging to his debtor, although
the latter, otherwise, may not be able to pay what he has borrowed. We speak,
however, of property which has not been given in pledge. Likewise, a wife
cannot bring an action for theft with reference to dotal property, which is at
her risk; but her husband can do so.
51. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXVII.
In the action for theft it is not the damages which are quadrupled or doubled,
but the true price of the property itself. If, however, the property has ceased
to exist at the time judgment is rendered, this, nevertheless, should be done.
The same rule applies if the property at present has become deteriorated, for
the valuation will be referred to the time when the theft was committed. If the
property has become more valuable, double the amount of the value will be
estimated at the time when it was worth the most; because it is more true to
say that the theft was committed at that time.
(1) Celsus asserts that a theft is committed with aid and advice, not only when
this is done in order that the parties might steal together, but even if this
intention did not exist, and where the theft was committed through motives of
hostility.
(2) Pedius very properly says that, as no one commits a theft without fraud,
assistance and advice to commit it cannot be given without fraud.
(3) He is considered to give advice who persuades, induces, and gives
information for the commission of the theft. He gives assistance who furnishes
his services and aid for the secret removal of the property.
(4) Anyone who shows a red cloth to cattle and puts them to flight, in order
that they may fall into the hands of thieves, and does so with fraudulent
intent, will be liable to an action for theft. Even if he does not do this for
the purpose of perpetrating a theft, so dangerous a jest should not go
unpunished. Therefore, Labeo says that an action in factumshould be granted
against him.
52. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XIII.
For if the cattle should precipitate themselves from some elevation, an
equitable action for wrongful damage will be granted as under the Aquilian Law.
53. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXVII.
When anyone gives aid or advice to a wife who steals the property of her
husband, he will be liable for theft.
(1) Even if he commits theft with her, he will be liable to the action for
theft, while she will not be liable.
(2) If she, herself, gives assistance to the thief, she will not be liable for
theft, but for the fraudulent removal of property.
(3) There is no doubt whatever that she will be liable for a theft committed by
her slave.
(4) The same must be said with reference to a son under paternal control who is
serving in the army; for he will not be liable for a theft perpetrated on his
father; but he will be responsible for the act of his castrensian slave, if the
latter steals from his father.
(5) If my son, who has a castrense peculium,steals something from you, let us
see whether I can bring an equitable action against him, as he has property
with which to satisfy the judgment. It may be maintained that the suit may be
brought.
(6) Will the father, however, be liable to his son if he has removed something
from his castrense peculium?is a question which we should consider. I think
that he will be liable, for he not only steals something from his son, but he
can also be sued in an action for theft.
(7) Mela says that a creditor who does not return a pledge after his money has
been paid to him is liable for theft, if he retains the pledge for the purpose
of concealing it, which I believe to be true.
(8) Where there are sulphur mines in a field, and anyone removes the sulphur
from them, the owner will be entitled to an action for theft and afterwards the
tenant can, by proceeding under his lease, compel the former action to be
assigned to him.
(9) If your slave, or your son, receives clothing for the purpose of cleaning
it, and it is stolen; the question arises whether you will be entitled to an
action for theft. If the peculiumof the slave is stolen, you can bring an
action for theft, but if it is not stolen, it must be said that an action of
this kind will not lie.
(10) If, however, anyone purchases stolen property, not knowing that this is
the case, and he is dishonestly deprived of it, he will be entitled to an
action for theft.
(11) It is stated by Labeo, that if a man should direct a flour-merchant to
furnish anyone with flour who asks for it in his name, and a passer-by having
heard this should ask for the flour in his name, and receive it, an action for
theft will lie in favor of the flour-merchant against the person who made the
demand, and not in my favor, for the flour-merchant was transacting business
for himself, and not for me.
(12) Where anyone receives my fugitive slave as his own from a duumvir, or from
any other magistrate who has authority to release persons from prison, or from
custody, will he be liable to an action for theft? It is established that if he
gave sureties, an action should be granted to the owner against them, and they
should assign their rights of action to me. If, however, he did not take
sureties but surrendered the slave to the claimant, as to one who was receiving
what belonged to him, the owner will be entitled to an action for theft against
the kidnapper.
(13) If anyone strikes gold or silver coins, or any other property, out of the
hand of another, he will be liable for theft, if he did so with the intention
that a third party should take them, and he should carry them away.
(14) Where anyone steals a silver ingot belonging to me, and makes cups out of
it, I can either bring suit for the theft of the ingot, or a personal one for
the recovery of the property.
The same rule applies to grapes, and their unfermented juice, and seeds; for
the action for the theft of grapes, their unfermented juice, and their seeds,
can be brought, as well as a personal action.
(15) A slave who alleges that he is free in order that money may be lent to him
does not commit theft, for he only asserts that he is a solvent debtor.
The same rule applies to one who pretends to be the head of a household in
order that money may the more readily be loaned to him when, in fact, he is a
son under paternal control.
(16) Julianus, in the Twenty-second Book of the Digest, says that if anyone
should receive money from me to pay my creditor, and, as he himself owes the
same sum to the same creditor, he pays it in his own name, he commits theft.
(17) If Titius sells property belonging to another, and receives the price of
it from the purchaser, he is not considered to have stolen this money.
(18) When one of two general partners receives property in pledge, and it is
stolen, Mela says that he alone who received the pledge will be entitled to an
action for theft, and that his partner will have no right to it.
(19) No one can commit a theft by words, or by writing; for it is an accepted
principle that a theft cannot be committed without handling the article in
question. Wherefore, giving assistance or advice only becomes criminal when the
property is afterwards handled.
(20) If anyone excites my ass to induce him to cover his own mares, for the
purpose of breeding colts, he will not be liable for theft, unless he had also
the intention of stealing. I gave this opinion to my friend Herennius
Modestinus, who consulted me from Dalmatia, with reference to stallions to
which mares had been brought for this purpose by a man who was afterwards held
liable for theft; if he had the intention of stealing, but if he had not, an
action in factumwould lie.
(21) As I was willing to lend money to Titius, who was an honorable man and
solvent, you substituted for him another Titius who was poor, representing to
me that he was the wealthy Titius, and, having received the money, you divided
it with him. You are liable for theft, as it was committed with your assistance
and advice, and Titius will also be liable for theft.
(22) If, when you make a purchase, anyone should lend you heavier than legal
weights, Mela says that he will be liable to the vendor for theft, and that you
also will be, if you were aware of the
facts; for you did not receive the article by the consent of the vendor, as he
was deceived in the weight.
(23) If anyone should persuade my slave to erase his name from an instrument,
for instance, from a bill of sale, Mela says, and I think, that an action for
theft can be brought.
(24) Where my slave has been persuaded to copy my registers, I think that an
action for the corruption of a slave can be brought against the person who
persuaded him; and if he himself copies them, an action for fraud should be
granted.
(25) When a string of pearls has been stolen, the number of them must be
stated. Where an action is brought for the theft of wine, the number of jars
which were taken must be mentioned. If vases are appropriated, the number must
be given.
(26) If my slave, who has the free administration of his peculium,should make
an agreement (but not for the purpose of donation), with someone who has stolen
his peculium,he is considered to have engaged in a legitimate transaction; for
although an action for theft may be acquired for his master, still it forms
part of the peculiumof the slave. If the entire penalty of double the value of
the theft is paid to the slave, there is no doubt that the thief will be
released. The result of this is, that if the slave should have received from
the thief what seems to him to be satisfaction for the property stolen, the
transaction will also be considered legitimate.
(27) Where anyone swears that he has not committed a theft, and he afterwards
handles the stolen property, the right of action for theft is extinguished, but
that to pursue the property is still preserved for the owner.
(28) When a stolen slave has been appointed an heir, the plaintiff can also
obtain the value of the estate in an action of theft, provided the slave died
before he entered upon the estate by the order of his master. The same result
can be obtained by bringing a personal action for the recovery of the dead
slave.
(29) If a slave who is to be free under a condition is stolen, or any property
conditionally bequeathed is appropriated and the condition afterwards should be
fulfilled, before the estate has been entered upon, the action for theft cannot
be brought, because the interest of the heir has ceased to exist. While the
condition is pending, however, the value of the slave should be estimated as
the price for which he could be sold.
54. The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXVIII.
When a man, by employing violence, steals anything from a house where no one
was at the time, he can be sued in an action to recover fourfold the amount of
the value of the stolen property, as well as in one for non-manifest theft, if
he should not be arrested while carrying away the property.
55. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXIX.
He who breaks a door for the purpose of causing injury (although property may
be taken away by others as the result of this), will not
be guilty of theft, for the wish and intention of the culprit make a
distinction in the case of crime.
(1) If a slave of the lender of an article for use steals it, and he from whom
it was taken is solvent, Sabinus says that an action on loan can be brought
against him, as well as one against the master on account of the theft
committed by the slave. Where, however, the master has the money which he
collected, the right of action for theft will be extinguished.
The same rule applies where the action on loan is dismissed.
(2) If your slave steals property which has been lent to you for use, an action
for theft will not lie against you, but only one on loan, because the property
was at your risk.
(3) Anyone who volunteers to transact the business of others is not entitled to
the action for theft, although the property may have been lost by his fault;
but judgment can be rendered against him in a suit based on voluntary agency,
if the owner transfers to him his right of action.
The same rule applies to one who administers affairs in the place of a
guardian, as well as to a guardian who is bound to observe diligence; as, for
example, where several testamentary guardians have been appointed, and one of
them alone, after having given security, undertakes the administration of the
trust.
(4) If you hold my property through the donation of another, and I steal it,
Julianus says that you can only bring the action for theft against me, if it
was to your interest to retain possession; for instance, if you have defended a
slave who was given in a noxal action, or if you have taken care of him when he
was ill, you will have a just cause to retain him against the person demanding
him.
56. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XIII.
If a creditor makes use of a pledge he is liable for theft.
(1) The opinion has been given that a person who has received something for his
own use, and lends it to another, is guilty of theft. Hence, it is sufficiently
apparent that a theft is committed, even if anyone uses the property of another
for his own advantage, and it makes no difference for it to be said that he
does not act with this end in view. For it is one kind of pecuniary profit to
give away someone else's property; and another to acquire for ourselves an
obligation on account of the resulting benefit. Hence he is guilty of theft who
secretly removes an article for the purpose of giving it to another.1
1 Essential differences existed as to what objects were susceptible of theft at
Civil and at Common Law. By the former, guilt was dependent upon the intention
to merely hold and use the property, as evinced by handling it; by the latter,
the design to permanently appropriate it was requisite to establish
criminality. Under the Roman rule, many things attached to the soil, as well as
choses in action, could be the subject of larceny, a doctrine not admitted by
English jurisprudence, which once went so far as to declare that a deed, being
land, could not be stolen. One school of Roman jurists long and vehemently
maintained that when real property was alienated by fraud the act was larceny,
an opinion which was subsequently discarded. --- ED.
(2) The Law of the Twelve Tables does not permit a thief, who is caught
stealing by day, to be killed, unless he defends himself with a weapon. By the
term "weapon" is meant a sword, a club, a stone, and finally everything which
can be used for the purpose of inflicting injury.
(3) As the action for theft has reference to the pursuit of the penalty, while
the personal action and that for the recovery of the property are employed for
the latter purpose, it is evident that if the property is recovered, the right
of action for theft will remain unimpaired, but that those of the other two
actions will be extinguished; as, on the other hand, after the penalty of
double or quadruple damages have been paid, the right to bring suit for the
recovery of the property, and that of the personal action, will remain
unimpaired.
(4) Anyone who knowingly lends tools to break open a door or a closet, or
knowingly lends a ladder for the purpose of climbing, even though, in the
beginning, he gave no advice for the commission of a theft, will still be
liable to an action for theft.
(5) If a guardian who administers the affairs of his trust, or a curator, makes
a compromise with a thief, the right of action for theft is extinguished.
57. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book III.
When a creditor carries away property which has been pledged to him, he is not
considered to handle it for the purpose of stealing it, but to take charge of
his own pledge.
58. Julianus, Digest, Book XXII.
Under certain circumstances, a thief, even while the obligation of his penalty
remains, again becomes liable, and can be sued several times for the theft of
the same property. The first instance which occurs is when the right to
possession is changed; for example, where the property again comes .into the
hands of the owner, and the same person steals it either from the same owner,
or from him to whom he lent, or sold it. If, however, the owner is changed, he
will be liable to a second penalty.
(1) Anyone who brings a thief before the Prefect of the Night Watch or the
Governor of a Province is understood to have chosen a way by which to recover
his property. If the matter is terminated there, and, by the conviction of the
thief, the stolen money is recovered, the question of theft appears to be
reduced to simple damages; especially if the thief was directed not only to
return the stolen property, but the judge ordered something else to be done, in
addition. Where, however, he was ordered to do nothing more than return the
stolen property, and the judge did not render a decision for anything else
against him, for the reason that the thief incurred the danger of a greater
penalty, it should be understood that the question of theft has been disposed
of.
(2) If property forming part of a peculium,after having been stolen, again
comes into the possession of the slave, the defect at-
taching to the theft is removed, and the property in this case begins to belong
to the peculium,and to be possessed by the slave.
(3) When, however, a slave secretly removes property belonging to his
peculium,with the intention of stealing it, so long as he retains it his
condition is not changed, for his master is not deprived of anything. If,
however, he delivers it to another, he commits a theft.
(4) A person who administers a guardianship has a right to compromise with a
thief, and if he remains in control of the stolen property, it ceases to be
such, because the guardian occupies the place of the owner.
The same thing must be said with reference to the curator of an insane person;
as he occupies the place of the owner to such an extent that, even by
delivering property belonging to the insane person, he is considered to
alienate it. The guardian and the curator of an insane person, however, can, in
their own names, bring suit for the recovery of the stolen property.
(5) If two of your slaves steal clothing and silver plate, and, on account of
one of the slaves, an action is brought against you to recover the stolen
clothing, and then, on account of the other, suit is brought against you for
the recovery of the silver plate, an exception should not be granted against
you, because an action has already been brought to recover the stolen clothing.
59. Alfenus, Epitomes of the Digest of Paulus, Book IV.
If anyone makes an excavation for the purpose of taking out chalk, and removes
it, he is a thief, not because he dug out the chalk, but because he took it
away.
60. Julianus, On Urseius Ferox, Book IV.
If property should be stolen from a son under paternal control, he can properly
bring an action for this cause after he becomes the head of a household. Where
property which has been leased to him has been stolen, he can also bring an
action on this account, after he becomes independent.
61. The Same, On Minicius, Book III.
When anyone who has lent an article for use steals it, an action for theft
cannot be brought against him, because he only took what was his, and the other
party to the transaction will be released from any liability growing out of the
loan. This, however, should only pe considered to refer to cases where he to
whom the article was lent had no reason for retaining it. For if he had
incurred any necessary expense on account of the article lent, it is rather to
his interest to retain it than to bring an action based on the loan, and
therefore he will be entitled to an action for theft.
62. Africanus, Questions, Book VII.
A female fugitive slave is understood, to a certain extent, to steal herself,
and also by taking her child with her she commits a theft.
63. The Same, Questions, Book Vill.
When a slave owned in common steals something from one of his masters, it is
established that an action in partition should be brought; and it is in the
discretion of the judge to order that the other master make good the damage, or
assign his share of the slave. The result of this appears to be that, even if
he has alienated his share, an action can also be brought against the
purchaser, as, in some respects, a noxal action follows the person. This rule,
however, should not be pushed to the extent of holding that even if the slave
should become free he can bring suit against him; just as an action could not
be brought if he belonged entirely to the other master. Therefore, it is
evident from this, that if the slave should die, there is nothing which the
plaintiff can recover on this ground, unless the other joint-owner has obtained
some benefit from the stolen property.
(1) He says that another result of this is, that if a slave, whom you have
given to me in pledge, steals something from me, by bringing the contrary
action of pledge I can compel you to make good the damage, or to surrender the
slave to me by way of reparation.
(2) The same must be said with respect to a slave who it was agreed might be
returned under certain circumstances, so that even the purchaser will be
required to restore all accessions and profits; and, on the other hand, the
vendor will be obliged to either make good the damage, or to surrender the
slave by way of reparation for the injury sustained, unless an action for a
larger amount can be brought.
(3) Where a man knowingly gives a thief in pledge to one who is ignorant of the
fact, he can be compelled to make good all damages; for this is in conformity
with good faith.
(4) In the action on purchase, however, what kind of a slave the vendor
represented him to be must, by all means, be taken into consideration.
(5) But, with reference to what concerns the action on mandate, he says that he
doubts whether it should also be held that all damages should be made good.
And, indeed, this principle should be observed even more than in the preceding
cases; so that if he who gave the order for the purchase of a certain slave did
not know that he was a thief, he will, nevertheless, be compelled to make good
all damages sustained; for it will be perfectly just for the agent to allege
that he would not have suffered the damage if he had not received the order.
This is still more evident in the case of a deposit, for although otherwise it
would appear equitable that no more damage should be sustained by anyone than
the slave himself is worth, it is much more equitable that the duty performed
by one person to another for his benefit, and not for that of him who undertook
it, should not injure the latter. And, as in the previously mentioned contracts
of sale, lease and pledge, it was stated that the person who knowingly kept
silent should be punished, so in these contracts, the negligence of those for
whose benefit they are entered into, should only be injurious to themselves.
For it is certainly the fault of the mandator who directed
the other party to purchase such-and-such a slave for himself, and it is also
the fault of him who deposited the property that they were not more diligent in
giving- warning as to the character of the slave who was deposited.
(6) With reference to a loan for use there is, however, reason for holding a
different opinion, since only the convenience of him who requested the use of
the property is concerned. Therefore, he who has made a loan for use, as in a
lease, cannot lose anything beyond the value of the slave, if he is not guilty
of fraud. Moreover, in this instance we ought to be a little more indulgent in
the interpretation of fraud, because (as has already been stated) the person
who lends the property does not profit by doing so.
(7) I think that this is true if no blame attaches to him who undertook to
execute the mandate, or to take charge of the deposit, where the owner himself
gave him any silver plate or a sum of money for safe-keeping; but on the other
hand, where the owner did not do anything of this kind, a different opinion
should be adopted.
(8) I leased you a tract of land, and (as is customary) it was agreed that I
should be entitled to the crops by way of pledge for the rent. He says that if
you should secretly remove them, an action for theft can be brought against
you. But if you should sell the crops to someone else before they have been
gathered, and the purchaser removes them, the result will be that we must hold
that they have been stolen; for as long as they are attached to the soil they
constitute a part of the land, and therefore belong to the tenant, for the
reason that he is considered to gather them with the consent of the owner;
which certainly cannot properly be said in the present instance. For how can
they become the property of the tenant, when the purchaser gathers them in his
own name?
(9) A slave who was ordered to be free under the condition of paying ten
aureiwas defended by the heir in a noxal action. While the case was still
pending, the slave, having paid the ten aureito the heir, obtained his freedom.
The question arose whether he should be discharged unless he gave to the
plaintiff the ten aureiwhich the heir had received. It was held that the source
from which the money had been obtained should be taken into consideration. If
it came from somewhere else than the peculium,the heir should pay it; because,
if the slave had not yet gained his freedom, and had been surrendered by way of
reparation, he would have paid the money to the person to whom he was
delivered. If, however, the money was derived from his peculium,for the reason
that he paid to the heir what the latter ought not to have permitted him to
give him, a contrary decision should be rendered.
64. Marcianus, Rules, Book IV.
He who shows the way to a fugitive slave does not commit atheft.
65. Mocer, Public Prosecutions, Book II.
The Governor of a province cannot prevent anyone who has been convicted of
theft from being branded with infamy.
66. Nerotius, Parchments, Book I.
Titius, an heir, having been charged with the legacy of a slave to Seius, the
said slave committed a theft against Titius, before the estate was entered
upon. If, after it had been entered upon, Seius should wish to have the legacy,
Titius could bring an action for theft against him, on account of the act of
the slave, because when the latter committed the crime, he did not belong to
Titius; and even though anyone should hold that if the slave had begun to
belong to him against whom he committed the theft, the right of action for
theft would be extinguished, so that even if he was alienated, suit could not
be brought on this ground. The slave did not become the property of Titius
until after the estate had been entered upon, because legacies pass directly
from the person who leaves them to him to whom they are bequeathed.
67. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Curule JEdiles, Book I.
He who has appropriated property belonging to another with the intention of
profiting by it, even though, having changed his mind, he may afterwards
restore it to the owner, is a thief; for no one by repentance ceases to be
responsible for such a crime.
68. Paulus., On Plautius, Book VII.
Where anyone who has given an article in pledge sells it, although he is the
owner, he commits a theft, whether he delivered it to the creditor or merely
bound himself by a special agreement.
Julianus holds the same opinion.
(1) If anyone from whom property has been stolen should bequeath it to me,
while it is in the hands of the thief, and the latter should afterwards
appropriate it, will I be entitled to an action for theft? According to the
opinion of Octavenus, such an action will only lie in my favor when the heir is
not entitled to one in his name; because it is established that, no matter in
what way the ownership of property may be changed, the owner will be entitled
to bring the action for theft.
(2) The ancient authorities gave it as their opinion that where anyone brings a
muleteer into court for fraud, and his mules die in the meantime, he will be
liable to theft.
(3) Julianus says that where a slave is appointed for the collection of money,
and collects it after he has been manumitted, he will be liable for theft.
The same rule applies to the case of a guardian to whom money is paid after
puberty.
(4) If you have recommended Titius to me as being solvent, and as being one to
whom I can lend money, and I make inquiries about him, and you afterwards
introduce to me someone else as Titius, you will be guilty of theft; because I
believe that he is Titius, and by all means if he who was brought to me knew of
the fraud. If you were not aware of it, you will not be guilty of theft, and he
who introduced
him does not appear to have given his assistance, as no theft was committed;
but an action in factumwill be granted against the person who brought him.
(5) If I stipulate with you not to do anything to prevent the slave Eros from
being given to me before such-and-such kalends,although it is to my interest
that he should not be stolen, still, if he is stolen, you will not be liable
under the stipulation; provided nothing was done by you to prevent him from
being given to me, and I will not be entitled to an action for theft.
69. Celsus, Digest, Book XII.
No one commits a theft by denying that a deposit has been made with him. For
the denial itself does not constitute an offence, although it comes very near
doing so. But if the person should acquire possession of the property for the
purpose of appropriating it, he perpetrates a theft. It does not make any
difference whether the bailor had a ring on his finger, or the box which
contained it, if, when it was deposited with the bailee, the latter intended to
appropriate it.
(1) If an article which you have promised to return on a certain day under a
penalty is stolen from you, and, for this reason, you are required to bear the
loss, this will also be taken into account in bringing the action for theft.
(2) A stolen child grew up in the hands of the thief. The latter is guilty of
stealing the youth as well as the child, and still, there is but one theft;
hence he is liable for double damages; an estimate being made of the greatest
value that the child had at any time after having been stolen. As the action
for theft can only be brought once, what reference does this have to the
question above proposed? For, if he had been stolen from the thief, and then
recovered by him from the other criminal, even if he had committed two thefts,
the action could not be brought against the thief more than once.
I do not doubt that the estimate of the value of the youth rather than that of
the infant should be made; for what would be so ridiculous as to consider the
condition of the thief to be improved on account of the continuation of his
crime?
(3) If the sale of a slave is annulled, the purchaser cannot bring the action
of theft against the vendor, because the slave, after his purchase and before
he was returned, stole something.
(4) When a stolen slave commits a theft against the thief himself, it is
decided that the thief will be entitled to an action against the owner on this
account, for fear that the crimes of such slaves may be committed with impunity
to themselves, and be a source of profit to their masters, as the peculiumof
slaves of this kind is frequently increased by their thefts.
(5) If a tenant, after the expiration of his lease, remains for more than a
year, and gathers the crops without the consent of the owner, let us see
whether an action for the theft of the harvest and vintage cannot be brought
against him. I do not think that there is any
doubt that he is a thief, and if he consumes the stolen property suit can be
brought to recover its value.
70. Marcellus, Digest, Book Vill.
Julianus denies that theft of property belonging to an estate can be committed,
unless the deceased gave it in pledge, or lent it;
71. Scsevola, Questions, Book IV.
Or where the usufruct belongs to another.
72. Marcellus, Digest, Book Vill.
For he held that, in these instances, theft of property belonging to an estate
could be committed, and usucaption be interrupted; and therefore that an action
for theft would lie in favor of the heir.
73. Javolenus, On Cassius, Book XV.
When a person to whom an article has been lent for use steals it, an action for
theft as well as one on loan can be brought against him, and if the one for
theft should be brought, the right of action on loan will be extinguished; and
if the one on loan is brought, an exception can be pleaded in bar of the action
for theft.
(1) Where property is held by anyone in the capacity of heir, the possessor
will not be entitled to the action for theft, although he can obtain the
property by usucaption; because he who is interested in not having it stolen
can bring the action for theft. This, however, seems to be the interest of the
person who would suffer the injury, and not of him who would be pecuniarily
benefited.
74. Modestinus, Opinions, Book VII.
Sempronia drew up a petition intending to give it to a centurion, in order that
it might be filed in court; but she did not give it to him. Lucius read it in
court as having been given to him officially. As it was not properly filed, or
delivered to the centurion, of what offence is he guilty who presumed to read
in court a petition stolen from the house of the person who drew it up, and who
did not deliver it for that purpose? Modestinus answered that if he who took it
did so secretly, he committed a theft.
75. Javolenus, On Cassius, Book XV.
If anyone who receives property in pledge should sell it, when no agreement had
been made with reference to its sale while pledged, or if he should dispose of
it before the day of sale arrives, and the debt is not paid, he renders himself
liable for theft.
76. The Same, Epistles, Book IV.
I possess, in good faith, a female slave who had been stolen, and whom I
purchased for two aurei.Attius stole her from me, and her owner and myself
brought suit against him for theft. I ask, what assessment of damages should be
made for both parties? The answer
was double the amount of his interest for the purchaser, and for the master
double the value of the woman.
The fact that the penalty for theft is paid to two persons should not cause any
difficulty, because although this is done on account of the same property, it
is paid to the purchaser by virtue of his possession, and to the owner on the
ground of his ownership.
77. Pomponius, On Quintus Mucius, Book XXI.
If anyone who represented himself to be an agent should induce me to promise to
pay either him or the person to whom he delegated me, I cannot bring an action
for theft against him, as there is no object which can be handled with the
intention of stealing it.
78. The Same, On Quintus Mucius, Book XXXVIII.
He who uses property which has been lent to, or deposited with him, in a
different way from that in which he was understood to receive it, not intending
to do this against the consent of the owner, is not liable for theft; nor will
he, under any circumstances whatsoever, be liable to an action on deposit. Will
he be liable to an action on loan? The answer depends upon how far he was to
blame; that is to say, whether he had reason to believe that the owner would
not have permitted him to make use of the article as he did.
(1) If anyone commits a theft against another, and a third party steals from
him what he himself appropriated, the owner of the property can bring suit
against the last thief; but the first thief cannot do so, because the interest
of the owner, and not that of the first thief is involved, as the stolen
property is safe. This was stated by Quintus Mucius, and is true; for although
it is to the interest of the thief that the property should be safe, because he
is liable to a personal action, still the party in interest can bring an action
against him, if his interest is based on a good title.
We do not adopt the opinion of Servius who held, if no owner of the stolen
property had appeared, or should afterwards appear, that the thief would be
entitled to the action of theft, for it could not then any the more be
understood to belong to him who proposed to profit by it pecuniarily.
Therefore, the owner will be entitled to an action for theft against both of
them, and if he begins suit against one, his right to bring such an action
against the other will continue to exist.
The same rule applies to a personal action, for both of them are liable for
different acts.
79. The Same, On Various Passages, Book XIII.
Where anyone steals a bag containing money, he is also liable for stealing the
bag, although he may not have had the intention of doing so.
80. Papinianus, Questions, Book Vill.
When anyone gives an article to be examined, and he who receives it assumes the
risk, he himself can bring the action for theft.
81. The Same, Questions, Book IX.
Where a debtor steals a pledge, he can, under no circumstances, recover what he
has paid in an action for theft.
82. The Same, Questions, Book XII.
If I sell, but do not deliver a slave, and he is stolen without any fault of
mine, the better opinion is that I will be entitled to an action for theft; and
I am considered to be interested, either because the property was in my hands
or because I will be obliged to assign my rights of action.
(1) When, however, the action of theft is postponed on account of the
ownership, although it does not lie unless we have an interest, still, my
benefit should be referred to the valuation of the article itself, even if I
have no other interest. This is proved in the case of slaves who are to become
free under a certain condition, and where a legacy is bequeathed conditionally.
Otherwise, where an attempt is made to prove something else, the amount cannot
be easily determined. Therefore, because the valuation solely depends upon the
benefit, as the action for theft arises without taking the ownership into
consideration, in instances of this kind the action for theft cannot be
referred to the valuation of the article.
(2) If I have brought an action for the production of property, intending to
make a choice of a slave who was bequeathed to me, and one of the slaves
belonging to the estate has been stolen, the heir will be entitled to an action
for theft, as he has an interest in the matter, and it makes no difference
whether the slave should have been guarded.
(3) No matter how a robber perpetrates a theft, he should be considered a
manifest thief.
(4) He, however, through whose fraudulent act a robbery is committed, is not
liable for theft, but for robbery with violence.
(5) If Titius, in whose name a false agent has collected money which was not
due, ratifies the payment, Titius, indeed, can himself bring an action for
business transacted; but he who paid the money which was not due will be
entitled to a personal action on that ground against Titius, and the action for
theft will also lie against the false agent. But if Titius should be sued, he
can not improperly avail himself of an exception on the ground of fraud, to
compel the right of personal action for theft to be assigned to him. If,
however, the money was due, and Titius ratifies the payment, the right of
action for theft will be extinguished, because the debtor is released.
(6) A false agent can also commit a theft of money, if he deceives the debtor
of another, by assuming the name of a genuine agent of the creditor. This also
applies to the case of one who asserts that money is due to him as the heir of
the creditor, Sempronius, when he is not the heir.
(7) A person who was accustomed to transact the business of Titius paid a false
agent of his creditor in his name, and Titius ratified the payment. The right
of action for theft will not arise in favor
of Titius, because as soon as the money has been paid, the action can be
brought by the person who paid it, as neither the ownership nor the possession
of the money belong to Titius. Titius, however, will be entitled to a personal
action for the recovery of money which was not due, and he who paid the money
can bring the action for theft. If Titius is sued on voluntary agency, the
money should be awarded to him by the decision of the court.
83. The Same, Opinions, Book I.
Anyone who steals money belonging to a municipality or a city is liable to an
action for theft, and not for the crime of peculation.
84. Paulus, Opinions, Book II.
A fuller or a tailor who receives clothing for the purpose of cleaning and
repairing it and makes use of it is, by doing so, considered to have committed
a theft, because the clothing was not received by him for that purpose.
(1) Where crops are stolen from land, the tenant, as well as the owner, can
bring the action for theft, because it was to the interest of both of them to
recover the property.
(2) Anyone who steals a female slave, who is not a prostitute, for licentious
purposes, will be liable to an action for theft; and if he conceals her, can be
punished under the Favian Law.
(3) Anyone who steals accounts or notes is liable to an action for theft, for
the amount contained in them. It does not make any diiference whether they have
been cancelled or not, because, by means of them it can be proved that the debt
was paid.
85. Neratius, Opinions, Book I.
Where anyone, thinking that a person is dead, who in fact is still living,
takes possession of his property as his heir, he does not commit a theft.
(1) If, after having begun an action for theft against a man in his own name,
you bring another against him for some article stolen by his slave, he cannot
plead an exception on the ground that both thefts were committed at the same
time.
86. Paulus, On Neratius, Book II.
Although stolen property cannot be acquired by usucaption unless it is returned
to the owner; still, if its appraised value in court is paid to the latter, or
he sells the property to the thief, it must be said that the right of
usucaption is not interrupted.
87. The Same, Manuals, Book II.
He who has an interest in not having the property stolen is entitled to the
action for theft, if he also has possession of it with the consent of the
owner; that is to say, where, for instance, the property is. leased to him. He,
however, who voluntarily administers affairs as a guardian, just like a regular
guardian or curator, cannot bring an
action for theft on account of property which has been stolen through his
fault.
Likewise, anyone to whom a slave is due either under the terms of a stipulation
or by a will, although he has an interest, cannot bring the action for theft;
nor can he do so who has become surety for a tenant.
88. Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book IX.
If property which has been stolen, or obtained by violence, comes into the
hands of the owner, and he is ignorant of the fact, it will not be considered
to have been restored to his control. Therefore, if after possession of this
kind the property should be sold to a bona fidepurchaser, usucaption cannot
take place.
89. Paulus, Decrees, Book I.
An action for theft will lie in favor of a creditor for the value of a pledge,
but not for the amount of the debt. But when the debtor himself steals the
pledge, the contrary is true; so that the action for theft can be brought for
the amount of money due, and for the interest on the same.
90. The Same, On Concurrent Actions.
Where anyone brings an action for robbery with violence, he cannot also bring
one for theft. If, however, he should prefer to bring an action of theft for
double damages, he can also bring one for robbery with violence; provided that
fourfold the value of the property is not exceeded.
91. The Same, On the Penalties of Civilians.
If a freedman or a client commits a theft against his patron, or a day laborer
steals from one who employs him, there will not be ground for an action of
theft.
92. Javolenus, On the Last Works of Labeo, Book IX.
A fuller was released from liability to the owner in an action on hiring. Labeo
denies that an action for theft will lie. Again, if he should bring an action
for theft before the action for hiring was brought against him, and before
judgment had been rendered with reference to the thief he should be released by
the action on hiring, and the thief ought also to be discharged so far as he is
concerned. If nothing of this kind previously occurred, judgment should be
rendered against the thief in favor of the fuller, and this is the case because
he has a right to the action for theft only to the extent of his interest.
(1) No one can give aid and advice to another who himself has no intention of
committing a theft.
93. Labeo, Epitomes of Probabilities by Paulus, Book II.
If anyone, knowing that property is being stolen from him, does not prevent
this from being done, he cannot bring an action for theft.
Paulus: The contrary is certainly true. For if anyone knows that property has
been stolen from him, and keeps quiet because he cannot prevent it, he can
bring an action for theft. If, however, he could have prevented it, but did not
do so, he can still bring an action for theft. In this way patrons are
accustomed to commit thefts against their freedmen, and also anyone who is
entitled to such respect or reverence that it prevents him from being resisted
by another in his presence, is accustomed to commit a theft.
94. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXVIII.
It must be remembered that thefts are generally prosecuted criminally, and that
he who institutes a prosecution signs the accusation, not that the judgment may
become public, but because it appears that the boldness of the culprit should
be restrained by extraordinary punishment. Anyone, however, who wishes, can
bring a civil action, if he desires to do so.1
TITLE III. CONCERNING THE THEFT OF TIMBERS JOINED TO A BUILDING.
1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXVII.
The Law of the Twelve Tables does not permit a beam which has been stolen to be
detached from a house, or a stake to be removed from a vine, or an action be
brought for its recovery; which provision has been prudently established by the
law to prevent buildings from being demolished, or the culture of vines being
interfered with, under this pretext. But where anyone is convicted of having
united these things, the law grants an action for double damages against him.
(1) In the term "beam" are included all the materials of which a house is
composed, and everything necessary for vines. Wherefore, certain authorities
hold that tiles, stone, brick, and other materials which are useful in building
(for the word beam is derived from the verb to cover), as well as lime and
sand, are embraced in this appellation. Also, in the case of vines, everything
required for their cultivation is included under this term, as, for instance,
stakes and props.
(2) An action for the production of property is, however, granted, for he
cannot be indulged who, knowing property to belong to another, includes it in,
or joins it to, or connects it with his own building, for we do not sue as the
possessor, but as one who has committed fraud to avoid being in possession.
1 Abandonment, by which title to stolen property could be acquired by the
Crown, was recognized as good cause for confiscation by the ancient law of
England. "By waving of goods, a property is gotten thus. A thief having stolen
goods, being pursued, flieth away and leaveth the goods. This leaving is called
waving, and the property is in the king; except the lord of the manor have
right to it, by custom of charter.
"But if the felon be indicted, adjudged, or found guilty, or outlawed, at the
suit of the owner of these goods, he shall have restitution of these goods, as
before." (Bacon Works, Use of the Law, Vol. IV, Page 127.) --- ED.
2. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XLII.
If, however, you suppose that suit has been brought for stolen timbers joined
to a house, the question may arise whether an action for the recovery of the
property will lie independently. I do not doubt that it will.
TITLE IV.
WHERE ANYONE WHO is ORDERED TO BE FREE BY THE TERMS
OF A WILL, AFTER THE DEATH OF His MASTER AND
BEFORE THE ESTATE is ENTERED UPON, is SAID TO
HAVE STOLEN OR SPOILED SOMETHING.
1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXVIII.
If, through the fraud of a slave who was ordered to be free after the death of
his master, and before the estate was entered upon, an act is said to have been
committed with reference to the property of the person who directed him to be
free, in order to prevent some of said property from coming into the hands of
the heir, a suit for double damages will be granted against him within the
available year.
(1) This action, however (as Labeo says), is founded rather on natural, than on
civil equity. For, as a civil action is not applicable, it is but just,
according to Natural Law, that the offender, emboldened by the hope of
impunity, should not go unpunished; since, having the expectation of speedily
obtaining his freedom, he believes that he cannot be chastised as a slave, nor
be condemned as a freeman because he steals from the estate, that is to say
from his owner; the master or the mistress cannot bring an action for theft
against the slave, even though he should afterwards become free, or be
alienated, unless he has also subsequently handled the property with the
intention of stealing it. Therefore the Prastor thought that the cunning and
impudence of those who despoil estates should be punished by an action for
double damages.
(2) A freedman of this kind will not be liable unless he is alleged to have
fraudulently wasted something. The fault and negligence of a slave after his
freedom has been obtained is excused; but gross negligence very closely
resembles fraud. Hence, if he committed some damage without fraud, this action
will not lie; although otherwise, he would be liable under the Aquilian Law for
having caused damage of any description whatsoever.
Therefore this action has certain restrictions, so that the slave must be
guilty of fraud not only after the death of his master, but before the estate
has been entered upon. But if he does not commit fraud, or does so during the
lifetime of his master, he will not be liable to this action. Nay more, the
action will not lie even after the death of his master and the acceptance of
the estate, for when the estate has once been entered upon, he can be sued as a
freeman.
(3) What, however, should be done, if he received his freedom under a
condition? In this instance, he will not yet be free, but can
be punished as a slave; and therefore it must be said that this action will not
lie.
(4) Where, however, his freedom is already obtained, it must be said that this
action can and should immediately be granted against him who has become free.
(5) When a slave who is absolutely bequeathed commits some illegal act against
the estate before it has been entered upon, it must be said that there will be
ground for this action, for the reason that the ownership of the slave is
changed.
(6) And, generally speaking, we say that, in a case where the ownership of the
slave is either changed or lost, or he acquires his freedom within a short time
after the estate has been entered upon, in this instance, this action should be
granted.
(7) Where freedom is bestowed upon a slave under the terms of a trust, and he
has committed some offence against the estate, can not the heir be prevented
from manumitting him before he gives satisfaction? And, indeed, it has been
frequently stated in Rescripts by the Divine Marcus, and by our Emperor
together with his Father, that, under these circumstances, freedom granted
unconditionally by a trust will not be prevented.
The Divine Marcus, however, stated in a Rescript that an arbiter must be
immediately appointed before whom the account should be rendered. This Rescript
has reference to the account to be rendered for acts which the slave performed
in the course of his administration. I think, then, that in this instance the
action will lie.
(8) Before the estate is entered upon, we should understand to mean before it
is accepted by one person alone, for as soon as one person does so, freedom is
acquired.
(9) Where a ward is appointed an heir, and freedom is granted as soon as he has
a substitute, and, in the meantime, some damage is committed, if this takes
place during the lifetime of the minor, there will be no ground for this
action. If, however, it should be committed after his death, and before anyone
succeeds him, there will be ground for it.
(10) This action will not only lie with reference to property belonging to the
estate of the testator, but also where it is to the interest of the heir that
fraud should not be committed to prevent the property from coming into his
hands. Therefore Scsevola treats the question more fully, for if the slave has
stolen property which the deceased received by way of pledge, this praetorian
action can be brought; because we understand the case of the property in a
broader sense as meaning utility. For if the Praator, on account of the
condition of servitude existing, substituted this action instead of the one for
theft, it is probable that he should have substituted it in every case in which
an action for theft could be brought. And, in a word, this action is understood
to lie with reference to property pledged, as well as to such as is held by
bona, fidepossessors.
The same rule applies to articles lent to the testator.
(11) Likewise, if this slave, who has the prospect of his freedom, should steal
crops which have been gathered after the death of the testator, there will be
ground for this action. When the children of slaves, or the increase of cattle
born after the death of the testator are involved, the same opinion must be
given.
(12) Moreover, if a child under the age of puberty, after the death of his
father, obtains the ownership of property, and the estate of the minor is
stolen before it has been entered upon, it must be said that there will be
ground for this action.
(13) This action can also be brought with reference to any property which it
was to the interest of the heir not to have appropriated.
(14) This action not only applies to thefts, but also to all cases involving
damage which the slave has committed against the estate.
(15) Sca3vola says that theft of possession can take place, for if there is no
possessor, theft cannot be committed; therefore theft cannot be committed
against an estate, because the latter has no possession, which is, indeed, a
matter of fact and intention. The heir does not have possession before he
actually obtains control of the property, because the estate only transmits to
him that of which it is constituted, and possession forms no part of it.
(16) It is true that if the heir can, in any other way, obtain that to which he
is entitled, the Praetorian Action should not be granted, since the decision is
based upon what the person has an interest in acquiring.
(17) Besides this action, it is established that a suit for recovery will also
lie, as this proceeding resembles one for theft.
(18) It must be said that this action will also lie in favor of the heir and
other successors.
(19) Where several slaves have received their freedom, and have maliciously
caused some injury, each of them can be sued for the entire amount, that is to
say, for double damages; and as they are prosecuted on account of the crime as
in the case of theft, none of them will be released, even though one should
make payment after he has been sued.
2. Gaiiis, On the Provincial Edict, Book XIII.
If, a short time before the freedom granted takes place, the slave should
secretly remove some article, or spoil it, the ignorance of the owner does not
authorize this action; and therefore, although the heir may have no information
whatever that the slave is to be free under a condition, or any other master
may not be aware that property has been appropriated or spoiled by his slave,
he cannot avail himself of any action after the slave has once obtained his
freedom, although in many other cases just ignorance may be alleged as an
excuse.
3. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIII.
Labeo thought that where a slave, who was manumitted under a condition,
secretly removed some article, and the condition was soon fulfilled, he would
be liable to this action.


TITLE V.
CONCERNING THEFT COMMITTED AGAINST CAPTAINS OF . VESSELS, INNKEEPERS,
AND LANDLORDS.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXVIII.
An action is granted against those who have control of ships, inns, and other
places of public entertainment, where anything is alleged to have been stolen
by any one of them, or by persons in their employ; whether the theft was
committed with the aid and advice of the proprietor himself, or the owner of
the ship, or of those who were on board for the purpose of navigation.

(1) We understand the words "for the purpose of navigation," to refer to those
who are employed to navigate a ship, that is to say, the sailors.
(2) This action is also for double damages.
(3) For when property is lost in an inn or on a ship, the owner or lessee of
the vessel, or the landlord, is liable under the Edict of the Praetor; so that
it is in the power of the person from whom the property was stolen to proceed
against the proprietor under the praBtorian law, or against the thief under the
Civil Law, whichever he may prefer.
(4) If the innkeeper or the owner of the ship received the property "to be
safely cared for," the owner of the same cannot bring the action for theft, but
he who assumed responsibility for its safe-keeping will be entitled to bring
it.
(5) The owner of the ship, however, can release himself from liability incurred
by the act of his slave, by surrendering the latter by way of reparation for
the damage committed. Why then should not the owner be condemned, who permitted
so bad a slave to remain on his ship? And why is he held liable for the entire
amount for the act of a freeman, and not for that of the slave? unless when he
employed a freeman, it was his duty to ascertain what his character was; but he
should be excused so far as his slave is concerned, just as in the case of a
bad domestic, if he is ready to surrender him by way of reparation for the
damage he committed. If, however, he employed a slave belonging to another, he
will be liable, as in the case of a freeman.
(6) An innkeeper is responsible for the acts of those who are in his house for
the purpose of transacting his business, as well as for all permanent lodgers;
he is, however, not responsible for the acts of travellers, since an innkeeper
cannot select the travellers, nor can he exclude them while they are pursuing
their journey. He, however, to a certain extent, selects his permanent lodgers,
if he does not reject them, and he must be liable for their acts. In like
manner, the captain of a ship is not liable for the acts of his passengers.


TITLE VI.
CONCERNING THEFTS ALLEGED TO HAVE BEEN MADE BY AN ENTIRE BODY OP SLAVES.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXVIII.
The Praetor introduced this most useful Edict in order to enable a master to
provide against the offences of his slaves; for instance, where several of them
had committed theft, they could not destroy the patrimony of their master if he
was compelled to surrender all of them by way of reparation for the injury
committed, or to pay the appraised value of each of them in court. Therefore,
if he desires to admit that his slaves are liable for damage committed by them,
he has the choice, under this Edict, to surrender all who participated in the
theft; or if he prefers to tender their estimated value, he can tender as much
as a freeman would be compelled to do, if he had committed a theft, and retain
his slaves.
(1) This power is granted to a master, whenever the theft was committed without
his knowledge. If, however, he was aware of it, this privilege will not be
conceded to him, for he can be sued in a noxal action both in his own name and
in the name of each of his slaves, and he cannot free himself from liability by
paying the estimated value once, which a freeman can do. The word "aware" is
understood to mean where he knew of the crime and could have prevented it, for
we should consider knowledge as also including the will. If, however, he was
aware of the theft and prevented it, it must be said that he is entitled to the
benefit of the Edict.
(2) Where several slaves have caused damage through their negligence, it is but
just that the same privilege should be granted their master.
(3) When several slaves steal the same article, and an action is brought
against the master on account of one of them, proceedings against the others
should remain in abeyance until the plaintiff, by the first judgment, recovers
as much as he would have done if a freedman had committed the theft:
2. Julianus, Digest, Book XXIII.
That is to say, double damages by way of penalty, and simple damages in the
personal action.
3. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXVIII.
Whenever the master pays as much as he would if a single freeman had committed
the theft, the right of action with reference to the others is extinguished,
not only against the master himself but also against the purchaser, if any one
of the slaves, who together had committed the theft, should be sold.
The same rule will apply if the slave should be manumitted. If the money had
first been collected from the manumitted slave, then the action will be granted
against the master of all the slaves; for it
cannot be said that what was paid by the manumitted slave was, as it were, paid
by all of them. I think it is clear that if the purchaser should pay, an action
against the vendor ought to be denied; for payment was, to a certain extent,
made by the vendor, against whom sometimes recourse can be had in such a case,
and especially if he declared that the slave who was sold was not liable to be
surrendered by way of reparation for damage, and was not guilty of theft.
(1) If an action should be brought against a legatee on account of a slave who
has been bequeathed, or against a person to whom he has been donated, can
proceedings also be instituted against the owner on account of the other slave?
is a question which may be asked. I think that this ought to be admitted.
(2) The relief of this Edict is not only granted to him who, possessing slaves
and having had judgment rendered against him, only pays as much as if a single
freeman had committed the damage, but it also benefits him who was condemned
because he committed fraud to avoid having possession.
4. Julianus, Digest, Book XXII.
The action to which a testator is entitled will lie in favor of the heirs of
him against whom several slaves of the same household have committed a theft;
that is to say, all of them will not recover any more than they would have done
if a freeman had perpetrated the theft.
5. Marcellus, Digest, Book Vill.
A number of slaves owned in common committed a theft with the knowledge of one
of their masters. An action for theft can be brought on account of all of them
against the owner who was aware of the crime, but against the other owner only
to the extent authorized by the Edict. If the former owner should pay, he can
recover his share from the other, but not the amount due for the entire body of
slaves.
Where a slave, owned in common, commits damage by order of one of his masters,
and the other makes payment, he can recover from his partner on the ground of
damage sustained by the property owned in common; provided he can bring suit
against him under the Aquilian Law, or the Law of the Twelve Tables. Therefore,
if I have only two slaves owned in common, an action can be brought against the
master who was aware that the damage had been committed, and this will include
both slaves, but he cannot recover more from his partner than if he had paid
for one alone. If, however, he should desire to proceed against the master who
did not know that any injury had been done, he can only collect double damages.
Let us see whether an action should not be granted against his partner, on
account of the other slave, just as if he had paid in the name of all of them.
In this case the decision of the Prsetor should be more severe, and no
indulgence should be shown to the one who was aware of the act of the slaves.
6. Sczevola, Questions, Book IV.
If my co-heir has collected double damages on account of a theft perpetrated by
a number of slaves, Labeo thinks I will not be prevented from bringing an
action for double damages; and that, in this way, a fraud will be committed
against the Edict; and that it is unjust for our heirs to collect more than we
ourselves could have done.
He also says that if the deceased recovered less than double damages, his heirs
cannot properly bring suit for more than equal portions ; but I think that the
better opinion is that the heirs can sue for their shares, and that both heirs
together cannot recover more than double damages including what the deceased
collected.
TITLE VII. CONCERNING TREES CUT DOWN BY STEALTH.
1. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IX.
Where trees are cut down by stealth, Labeo says that an action should be
granted under the Aquilian Law, as well as under the Law of the Twelve Tables.
Trebatius, however, holds that both actions should be granted in such a way
that the court, in rendering a decision in the second action, should deduct the
amount recovered in the first, and give judgment for the remainder.
2. Gaius, On the Law of the Twelve Tables, Book I.
It should be remembered that those who cut down trees, and especially vines,
are also punished as thieves.
3. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLH.
The larger number of ancient authorities held that vines were included in the
term "trees."
(1) Ivy, as well as reeds, are not improperly styled trees.
(2) The same may be said to apply to willows.
(3) But when anyone, for the purpose of planting willows, has inserted branches
into the ground, and these are cut down or torn up, before they have taken
root, Pomponius very properly says that the action for cutting down trees
cannot be brought, as that cannot properly be called a tree which has not yet
become rooted.
(4) If anyone removes a tree from a nursery, that is to say, with its roots,
although it may not yet have taken hold of the soil, Pomponius, in the
Nineteenth Book on Sabinus, says that it should be considered a tree.
(5) Therefore, that also may be considered a tree whose roots have ceased to
live, although it still remains in the earth. This opinion is also adopted by
Labeo.
(6) Labeo thinks that a tree can properly be so called which, having been torn
out by the roots, cannot be replaced, or which has been removed in such a way
that this can be done.
(7) Olive sprouts should be considered trees, whether they have thrown out
roots or not.
(8) An action, therefore, can be brought on account of all the trees which we
have above enumerated.
4. Gaius, On the Law of the Twelve Tables.
It certainly cannot be doubted that, where a sprout is still so small as to
resemble a blade of grass, it should not be included in the number of trees.
5. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IX.
To cut down is not merely to cut, but to cut with the intention of felling; to
girdle is to remove the bark; to cut away is to cut underneath ; for one cannot
be understood to have cut down a tree who has divided it with a saw.
(1) In this proceeding the cause of action is the same as in that under the
Aquilian Law.
(2) He who has the usufruct in the land cannot bring this suit.
(3) He who has leased land belonging to the State can bring this suit, just as
he can the action for taking care of rain-water and the one to establish
boundaries.
6. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XX.
Where several persons have cut down the same tree by stealth, the action can be
brought against each one of them for the entire amount.
(1) When, however, the same tree belongs to several persons, the penalty can
only be collected once by all of them together.
(2) Where a tree has extended its roots into the soil of a neighbor, the latter
cannot cut them off, but he can bring an action to show that the tree does not
belong to him; just as he can do if a beam, or a projecting roof extends over
his premises. When a tree is nourished by roots in the soil of a neighbor it,
nevertheless, belongs to him from whose land it derives its origin.
7. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXVIII.
Trees are considered to have been cut by stealth when they are felled without
the knowledge of the owner, and with the intention of concealing it from him.
(1) Pedius says, that this action is not one of theft, as it is possible for a
person to cut down trees by stealth without the intention of committing theft.
(2) If anyone should tear out a tree by its roots or extirpate it, he will not
be liable to this action, for he did not cut it down, or cut it away, or cut it
off. He will, however, be liable under the Aquilian Law for having broken it.
(3) Even if the entire tree has not been cut down, the action will properly be
brought as if it had been cut down.
(4) A person will be liable under this action whether he girdles, cuts off, or
cuts down trees with his own hands, or whether he orders his slave to do so.
The same rule applies when he gives such an order to a freeman.
(5) When a master did not order his slave, but the latter committed the act
voluntarily, Sabinus says that a noxal action will lie, as in other offences.
This opinion is correct.
(6) This action, although it is a penal one, is perpetual, and is not granted
against an heir, but it will be granted in favor of an heir and other
successors.
(7) Judgment in a case of this kind includes double damages.
8. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXIX.
In computing the amount of the interest of the owner in not having the damage
committed, the value of the trees themselves should be deducted, and an
appraisement made of what remains.
(1) Whoever cuts down a tree clandestinely cuts it down by stealth.
(2) Therefore, if he should cut and remove it for the purpose of profiting by
it, he will be liable for the theft of the wood, and also to a personal action,
as well as to one for the production of property.
(3) Anyone who, with the knowledge of the owner, cuts down a tree by violence,
is not liable to this action.
9. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XIII.
When a tenant cuts down trees, suit can be brought against him under the lease;
but it is clear that the plaintiff should be content with a single action.
10. Julianus, On Minicius, Book HI.
Where there are two parts of one tree, and they are united above the ground,
they are regarded as a single tree. But if the point of union is not visible,
there are as many trees as there are trunks above the surface.
11. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXII.
Where, however, proceedings have been brought under the Aquilian Law for trees
cut down, and judgment under the interdict Quod vi aut clamhas been rendered,
the defendant will be discharged, if, under the first decision, he has made a
sufficient payment; but suit under the Law of the Twelve Tables can still be
brought.
12. Javolenus, On Cassius, Book XV.
Anyone who sells a field, can, nevertheless, bring an action for the cutting of
trees before the sale has been concluded.1
1 The Romans seem to have derived their nomenclature of larceny from the
Hindus, who, however, included almost every kind of fraud, even the intentional
administration of unsuitable remedies by physicians, in that category. The
penalty was a fine, which was regulated by the value of the article in
question, the circumstances of the case, and the status of the offender.
(Gentoo Code, XVII, I, II, III.)
TITLE VViillll..
CONCERNING THE ROBBERY OF PROPERTY BY VIOLENCE, AND DISORDERLY ASSEMBLAGES.
1. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXII.
Anyone who takes property by force is liable to the action of non-manifest
theft for double damages, and to the action of robbery with violence for
quadruple damages. If the action for robbery with violence is first brought,
that of theft will be refused. If that for theft is first brought, the other
will not be refused, but only what exceeds the amount included in the first
suit can be recovered.
The general definition of theft under the Roman law included many crimes which
are known to us under separate designations, such as burglary, embezzlement,
kidnapping, and other illegal acts committed with a view to the fraudulent
acquisition of property. "Furtum fit, non solum cum guis intercipiendi causa
rem alienam amovet sed generaliter cum, quis rem alienam invito domino
contrectat."Not only must the animus furandiexist, but in addition, in order to
constitute the offence, it was absolutely essential that the article should be
handled by the thief. By the Law of the Twelve Tables the offence was punished
with death. Milder penalties, such as scourging, hard labor in the mines,
condemnation to servitude and exile, were afterwards ordinarily substituted for
this, although it could still, in many instances, lawfully be imposed.
The Ancient Castilian authorities adopted verbatimthe Roman classification of
manifest and non-manifest theft. The penalty prescribed was the return of the
stolen property with either double or fourfold its value, dependent upon
whether the crime was non-manifest or manifest. Scourging could, in the
discretion of the court, also be inflicted. (Las Siete Partidas,VII, XIV, 1,
18.)
The Visigothic Code exacted the payment of nine times the appraised value of
the stolen goods by a freeman, and six times the value by a slave. Each,
without regard to his social rank, received a hundred lashes with a scourge. If
the culprit was unable to pay the fine, he was sentenced to serve the owner of
the property for life, as a slave. "Cuiuslibet rei furtum, et quantalibet
pretii zestimatione taxatum, ab ingenuo navies, a. servo vero sexies, ei que
perdidit sarcietur, et uterque reus C. flagellorum verberibus coerceatur. Quod
si aut ingenuo desit unde componat, aut dominus componere pro servo non adnuat;
persona, qux se furti contagw sordidavit, servitura rei domino perenniter
subiacebit." (Forum Judicum,VII, II, 13.)
In Babylonia, theft was punished with exemplary severity.
"If a man steal the property of a temple or palace, that man shall be put to
death; and he who receives from his hand the stolen property shall also be put
to death."
"If a man purchase silver or gold, manservant or maid servant, ox, sheep or
ass, or anything else from a man's son, or from a man's servant without
witnesses or contracts, or if he receive the same in trust, that man shall be
put to death as a thief."
"If a man steal ox or sheep, ass or pig, or boat, if it be from a temple or a
palace, he shall restore thirtyfold; if it be from a freeman, he shall render
tenfold. If the thief have nothing wherewith to pay he shall be put to death."
(The Code of Hammurabi, 6, 7, 8.)
The degrees of theft are enumerated as follows in the old Law of Wales: "There
are three kinds of theft, taking by theft; retaining what is stolen; and
killing a living animal that is stolen. Each of these three forfeits life for
the crime, and cannot be bought off." (The Ancient Laws of Cambria, Triads of
Dyvnwal Moelmud, 139.)
"Theft is every thing that is denied having been taken away."
2. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LVI.
The Praator says: "If any damage is said to have been committed maliciously
against anyone by persons unlawfully assembled, or his property is said to have
been taken by violence, I will grant an action against whoever is alleged to
have done these things. Likewise, if a slave is said to have committed these
acts, I will grant a noxal action against his master."
(1) By this Edict, the Praetor has provided against illegal acts committed by
force. For if anyone can prove that he has suffered violence, he can proceed by
means of a public action against violence, and certain authorities hold that
the private action should not prejudice the public one. It, however, seems to
be more available, and
"Surreptitiousness is every thing which is taken away in the absence of the
owner, and not denied."
"In the law of Howel, if the stolen goods amount to four pence in value, the
thief must pay it; but if it amount to any more, the thief loses his life
Others contend that for every four-footed animal that is taken in theft, the
thief forfeits his life; nevertheless, it is the most safe to limit it to four
pence."
"The price of a thief who is valued is seven pounds. He who forfeits his life
does not lose any of his property." (Laws of Howel the Good, Pages 217, 218,
^219,)
Greece, despite her advanced civilization, was not, so far as the harshness of
punishment for theft was concerned, in any respect behind her barbarian
contemporaries. In general, fourfold damages were assessed, half of which was
paid into the Public Treasury; sometimes tenfold the value of the property was
collected, and the thief placed in the stocks for five days and nights. A law
formulated by Draco provided that, "He that takes away anything which is not
his own shall be liable to die for it." (Potter, Antiquities of Greece, I, I,
26.)
Under the Mosaic law the thief was condemned to double, quadruple, or quintuple
restitution, according to circumstances.
"If a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it, he shall
restore five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep."
"If the theft be certainly found in his hand alive, whether it be ox, or ass,
or sheep; he shall restore double." (Exodus, XXII, 1, 4.)
Among Mohammedans, secrecy is an essential element of the crime of larceny, and
the property must have a value of from three to twelve dirhems, that is to say,
from twenty-seven cents to one dollar and eight cents, the various sects
differing in opinion as to the legal standard to be prescribed. Some things are
held to be incapable of valuation for this purpose, as not being sufficiently
precious to justify the infliction of the atrocious penalty, for instance,
fowls, vegetables, fish, wood, and grass. While theft from a house of worship,
or the Public Treasury, has, by other legislators, been visited with greater
retribution than when the offence is committed against individuals, Moslem
jurists are agreed that stealing part of a mosque, or the appropriation of
public funds is not punishable by the ordinary penalty; in the latter instance,
because the thief, along with everyone else, has an interest in the money of
the community at large. By a singular provision, this penalty is not imposed
when a book is appropriated, on the principle that its contents, which do not
admit of appraisement, are what the culprit desired to obtain possession of.
A person convicted of theft is sentenced to have his right hand amputated at
the wrist for the first offence; for the second, he loses his left foot.
(Hughes, Dictionary of Islam, Title, Larceny.) This is in accordance with the
precept of Mohammed: "If a man or woman steal, cut off their hands." (Koran,
Sura, V, 42.) In some parts of the Moslem world, the mutilation has been
materially diminished in severity, and only four fingers are amputated, or some
teeth are extracted.
although it may interfere with the operations of the Lex Juliahaving reference
to private violence, still, an action ought not to be refused those who select
the private remedy.
(2) He who commits robbery by violence not only perpetrates the crime
maliciously, as stated in the Edict, but also when he seizes property by force,
after having formed his plan, and collected armed men for the purpose of
causing damage.
(3) Therefore, whether he himself assembles men, or makes use of those who
already have been assembled by another in order to commit robbery, he is
considered to have acted with malice.
(4) We should understand men who have been assembled to be such as are brought
together for the purpose of causing damage.
(5) It is not added what kind of men, hence it makes no difference whether they
are free or slaves.
(6) If only one man is called upon, we still say that men have been assembled.
(7) Again, if you suppose that only one has caused the damage, I do not think
that the words of the Edict will fail to be applicable, for when it says,
"Persons unlawfully assembled," we must understand this to mean that, whether
one alone is guilty of violence, or whether he acts in company with others who
are assembled and they are either armed or unarmed, he will be liable under
this Edict.
Imprisonment for life is occasionally substituted for these cruel penalties.
(Tor-nauev, Le Droit Musulman,Page 298.)
In China, a thief is liable to many degrees of punishment, the most common one
being whipping with a bamboo, the number of blows varying with the estimated
value of the articles stolen. Branding, banishment, and death by strangulation
are also resorted to in extreme cases. Even an unsuccessful effort to commit a
dishonest act entails a rigorous penalty. "All persons found guilty of an
attempt to steal, shall be punished with 50 blows." (Staunton, The Penal Code
of China, Sec. CCLXIX.)
The Anglo-Saxons at first imposed not only a fine (wite),but also damages
(bot),by way of reparation for the perpetration of theft. The "wite"prescribed
by Athelstan was one hundred and twenty shillings.
"If a freeman steal from the king, let him pay nine-fold."
"If a freeman steals from a freeman, let him make three-fold "bot,"and let the
king have the "wite"and all the chattels." (Ancient Laws and Institutes of
England; Laws of King Ethelbert, 4, 9.) In time, punishments became much more
severe. "If a man seize a freeman with stolen goods upon him, then let the king
have power of one of three things, either that he be slain; or sold beyond sea;
or redeemed with his "wer-geld."(The Laws of King Wihtred, 26.) "Let a
notorious thief seek whatever he may seek, or he who is found in plotting
against his lord, so that they never seek life; unless the king will grant them
salvation of life." (The Laws of King Edgar, II, 7.) Even youth could not be
alleged in extenuation of this offence, if the culprit was found with the
stolen goods in his possession. "That no thief be spared, who may be taken
"hand-htebbende,"above XII years, and above eight pence." (Laws of King
Athelstan, I, 1.)
The old English jurists adopted the Roman definition and classification of
theft without substantial modification. "Furtum est, secundum leges,
contractatio rei alienas fraudulenta, cum, animo furandi, inuito illo dno cuius
res ilia fuerit. Cum animo dico, quia sine animo furandi non committitur."
"Species autem furti sunt dux, quia aliud publicum aliud priuatum. Videlicet
manifestum & non manifestum.. Non manifestu est, vbi quis suspectus est de
latrocinio per famam patriss, p indictametum & rectum, & vbi graues
prazsumptiones
(8) The mention of malice includes violence, for he who employs violence acts
maliciously. It does not, however, necessarily follow that he who is malicious
employs violence; hence malice suggests violence, and he who commits an act
without violence But deceitfully is equally included.
(9) The Praetor says "damage." This word refers to every kind of injury, even
that which is clandestine. I do not think, however, that all clandestine damage
is included, but only such as is combined with violence. For anyone will give a
suitable definition if he were to say that he who committed damage alone, and
without violence, is not included in this Edict, and that if it was committed
by persons who are assembled, even without violence, provided malice was
present, it will come within the terms of this Edict.
(10) But neither the action of theft, nor that provided for by the Aquilian Law
should be included in this Edict, although sometimes they coincide with it; for
Julianus says that he who commits robbery by violence is a more unprincipled
thief; and that he who commits any damage with the aid of assembled persons can
also be held liable under the Aquilian Law.
(11) "Or his property is said to have been taken by violence." When the Prater
says, "Property taken by violence," we must understand this to apply even where
only one article has been obtained by force.
faciunt contra ipsum."(Bracton, De Legibus Consuetudinibus Angliee.Ill, XXXII,
150, 152, Fleta, Commentarius Juris AnglicaniI, 38.)
The distinction between grand and petit larceny, which depended upon whether
the stolen property was worth more or less than twelve pence, dates back to the
origin of the Common Law. Theft of a larger sum than this was felony, and
subjected the offender to the penalty of death. "Si la chose passe XII deners,
adonques eient jugement de la mart."(Britton, De Legibus Anglicanis,47, 52.)
The doctrine of the Civil Law that, when several had perpetrated a theft
together, they were not severally liable merely for the value of their
respective shares of the stolen property, but that each was to be held for
stealing all of it, was also accepted. "Si deux ou trois jointement aueront
emblee biens al value de XII d. ob, cest felony in eux toutes."(Staundforde,
Les Flees del Coron,I, 15.)
Grand larceny was a capital offence in England down to comparatively recent
times. "The punishment of grand larceny is death and loss of goods, the
punishment of petit larceny is loss of goods and whipping, but not death."
(Hale, Pleas of the Crown, I, XLIII.) The distinction between grand and petit
larceny was abolished in 1827 (Stat. 7 & 8, Geo. IV, c. 29) ; and this
provision was, for some reason, which is not apparent, repeated in the Larceny
Act of 1861. (Stat. 24 & 25, Vie., c. 96.)
The definitions of larceny as given by English and American authorities vary
somewhat in phraseology, but are substantially the same. "Larceny, by the
Common Law, is the felonious and fraudulent taking and carrying away by any man
or woman, of the meree personallgoods of another, neither from the person, nor
by night in the house of the owner." (Coke, Institutes III, XLVII.)
"Larceny may be defined to be the fraudulent taking and carrying away of a
thing without claim of right, with the intention of converting it to a use
other than that of the owner, without his consent." (Wharton, A Treatise of
Criminal Law, Sec. 1095.)
At present, in every civilized country, theft is punishable by either fine and
imprisonment, or by both. --- ED.
(12) If anyone does not himself assemble men, but is found among them, and
either takes anything by violence, or causes some damage, he will be liable
under this action. But does this Edict only refer to damage fraudulently or
violently committed by men assembled by the defendant, or does it also refer to
robbery by violence, or damage committed by the men aforesaid, although they
may have been called together by another, is a question which has been asked.
It is better to hold that this also is the case, so that all these things are
comprehended, as well as any injury committed by persons assembled by another,
so that he who assembled them, as well as he who joined them, may be considered
to be included.
(13) In this action the true price of the property is quadrupled within the
available year, but not the amount of the interest of the plaintiff.
(14) This action will also lie with reference to a household, with-.out it
being necessary to show who among the members of the same committed the robbery
by violence, or even the damage. The term "household" also includes the slaves,
that is to say those that are in service, although it may be alleged that they
are free, or are the slaves of others serving us in good faith.
(15) I do not think that by means of this action the plaintiff can proceed
against the master on account of his slaves, because it will be sufficient for
the master to once tender fourfold the amount involved.
(16) Under this suit for reparation, a surrender should not be made of the
entire number of slaves, but only of those, or of him, who is proved to have
caused the damage.
(17) This action is commonly styled one for property taken by violence.
(18) He alone is liable in this action who has been guilty of fraud. Therefore,
if anyone forcibly seizes what is his own, he will not be liable for taking
property in violence, but he will be fined in a different way. If, however,
anyone should forcibly seize his own slave, of whom another has possession in
good faith, he will, in like manner, not be liable under this action, because
he removes his own property. But what if he takes away some article that had
been encumbered to him? He will be liable.
(19) The action for property taken by violence will not be granted against a
child under the age of puberty who is not capable of criminality, unless his
slave, or his body of slaves, are alleged to have committed the offence, and,
when this is the case, he will be liable in a noxal action for property taken
by violence by his slave, or by a number of his slaves.
(20) If a farmer of the revenue should drive away my cattle, thinking that I
have committed some offence against the tax law, although he may be mistaken,
still, I cannot bring an action against him for property taken by violence,
Labeo says, for he is not guilty of fraud.
Where, however, he shuts up the cattle in order that they may not feed, and
causes them to perish with hunger, a praetorian action can be brought under the
Aquilian Law.
(21) When anyone shuts up cattle which he has taken by violence, suit can be
brought against him on this account.
(22) In this action we do not merely consider whether that which has been
forcibly seized constitutes part of the property of the plaintiff, for, whether
it does or does not, if it has any connection with it, there will be ground for
this proceeding. Therefore, whether the property is loaned for use, or leased,
or even pledged, or deposited with me, and hence it is to my interest that it
should not be removed, or if any of it is possessed by me in good faith; or I
have an usufruct or any other right in it, so that it is to my interest that it
shall not forcibly be taken away, it must be said that I will be entitled to
this action, not that the ownership, but merely that what has been removed from
my property, that is to say, from my substance, may be recovered.
(23) And, generally speaking, it must be held that an action for theft will lie
in my favor for whatever has been done clandestinely in all these cases, and
that I will be entitled to a right of action on this ground. Someone, however,
may say that we are not entitled to an action for theft on account of property
which has been deposited, but with reference to this, I have added: "If it is
to our interest that the property should not be taken by violence," for then I
am entitled to an action for theft.
(24) If, where property is deposited, I have become responsible for negligence,
or if I have received the value of the deposit, but not as compensation, it is
more proper to hold that even though the action for theft based on the deposit
will not lie, one for property taken by force can be brought; because only a
very small difference exists between one who acts clandestinely, and one who
takes property by violence, as the former conceals his crime, and the other
publishes his, and even commits it publicly. Therefore, when anyone proves that
he has only a moderate interest in the matter, he should have an action for
property taken by violence.
(25) If my fugitive slave buys articles to be used by himself, and they are
taken away by force, for the reason that the said articles are included in my
property, I can bring an action for robbery with violence.
(26) When property is taken by violence, an action can be brought for theft or
wrongful damage, or a personal action will be available, or proceedings can be
instituted for the recovery of each article.
(27) This action will lie in favor of the heir and other successors. It shall
not, however, be granted against heirs and other successors, because a penal
action cannot be brought against them. Let us see whether it should be granted
for something by which they have become pecuniarily benefited. I think that the
Praetor did not
promise the action against the heirs for what comes into their hands, because
he thought that the personal action was sufficient.
3. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LIV.
If a slave takes property by violence, and an action is brought against him
when he becomes free, although he has the power to proceed against his master,
suit cannot legally be brought against the manumitted slave after a year has
elapsed; because, no matter against whom proceedings could have been
instituted, the plaintiff will be excluded. If an action should be brought
against the master within a year, and afterwards one is brought against the
manumitted slave, Labeo says that an exception on the ground of res
judicata,will operate as a bar.
4. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LVI.
The Praetor says: "When any damage is said to have been committed maliciously
by one of a mob, I will grant an action for double damages against him within
the year from the time when proceedings could have been instituted, and, after
a year has elapsed, I will grant an action for simple damages."
(1) This Edict is introduced with reference to damage committed by any member
of a disorderly crowd.
(2) Labeo says that the term "crowd" indicates a kind of riotous assemblage,
and that it is derived from a Greek term signifying to "make a tumult."
(3) How large a number shall we consider to constitute a crowd? If two persons
engage in a quarrel, we should not understand this to be done by a crowd,
because two persons cannot properly be said to compose one. If, however, there
should be a larger number, for instance, ten or fifteen persons, they may be
called a crowd. But what if there are only three or four? This will not be a
crowd.1Labeo very properly says that there is a great difference between a
tumult and a quarrel; because a tumult is the uproar and disturbance made by a
multitude of men, and a quarrel is made by only two.
(4) Not only he who causes damage while in a tumultuous assemblage is liable
under this Edict but also he who maliciously exerted himself in order that
damage might result from the acts of the assemblage whether he was present or
not, for malice can be manifested even if the person is absent.
(5) It must be said that he also is liable under this Edict who joined the
crowd, and advised the damage to be committed; provided, however, he himself
was present when it was done, and was there with evil intent, for it cannot be
denied that the damage was committed by the crowd through his malicious
interference.
(6) Where a man on his arrival excites or unites a crowd either by his cries,
or by any act, either accusing someone, or arousing pity, and through his
malicious conduct damage is committed, he will be
1 The English rule, as promulgated by Coke, established ten as constituting aa
ccrroowwdd,, ""Multitudinem decem facunt."- --- ED.
liable; even if he did not have the intention of convoking the assemblage. For
it is true that through his malice damage was committed by the crowd, and the
Praetor does not require that it should be brought together by the person
himself, but that the damage should be committed through the malicious
instigation of one forming a part of it.
The following difference exists between this Edict and the former one, namely:
in the first the Praetor speaks of damage maliciously committed by persons
tumultuously assembled, or robbery with violence perpetrated by them where they
were not assembled; but in the second, he refers to damage committed
maliciously by a crowd, although the accused person did not convoke it, but
where it was incited by his cries, or his languages, or because he aroused
pity, even if another assembled the mob, for he himself constituted part of it.
(7) Therefore, on account of the atrocity of the deed, the first Edict presents
a penalty of quadruple damages, and the latter one of double damages.
(8) Both of them, however, grant the power of bringing an action within a year,
but, after the year has elapsed, an action for only simple damages will lie.
(9) Moreover, this Edict mentions damage which has been caused and property
which has been lost, but it does not refer to robbery .with violence; still,
suit can be brought for robbery with violence under the former Edict.
(10) Property is said to be lost which has been allowed by anyone to be
destroyed, as for instance cut, or broken to pieces.
(11) Again, this action is in factum,and is granted for double the value of the
property, which has reference to its true price and the estimate made at the
present time, is always doubled within a year.
(12) The plaintiff must prove that the damage was caused by a mob. If, however,
it was caused in any other way than by a mob, this action will not lie.
(13) If, when Titius struck my slave, a crowd assembled, and the slave lost
something thereby, I can bring suit against the person who struck him, even
though the crowd was responsible for the loss, and he began to strike him in
order that injury might be committed.
The action, however, will not lie if any other cause for striking him existed.
(14) When, however, anyone himself assembles a crowd, and beats the slave in
its presence for the purpose of doing him injury, and not with the intention of
causing damage, the Edict will apply; for it is true that he who strikes anyone
unjustifiably displays malice, and that he who is responsible for the
commission of damage commits it.
(15) The Praetor grants an action against a slave, and against an entire body
of slaves.
(16) What we have stated with reference to heirs and other successors being
entitled to bring the action for property taken by violence may be repeated
here.
5. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XXI.
It will not benefit the person guilty of robbery with violence to restore the
property before judgment is rendered, with a view to avoiding the penalty.
6. Venuleius, Stipulations, Book XVII.
The law forbids property which has been possessed or taken by violence to be
acquired by usucaption, before it again comes under the control of the owner,
or his heir.
TITLE IX.
CONCERNING FIRE, DESTRUCTION, AND SHIPWRECK, WHERE A BOAT OR A SHIP is TAKEN BY
FORCE.
1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LVI.
,The Praetor says: "When it is alleged that anyone at a fire, in the
destruction of a building, in a shipwreck, or in an attack on a boat or a ship,
has taken anything by violence, or fraudulently appropriated property, or
caused any loss, I will grant an action for quadruple damages within a year
after the time when an action can be brought, and, when the year has elapsed, I
will grant an action for double damages. I will also grant the action against a
slave, and an entire body of slaves."
(1) The benefit of this Edict is evident, and its severity is perfectly
justifiable, since it is to the interest of the public that nothing should be
stolen under such circumstances. And, although these crimes can be prosecuted
criminally, still, the Praetor very properly provides that civil actions may be
brought, where offences of this kind have been perpetrated.
(2) How should we understand the words "at a fire?" Do they mean in the fire
itself, or only in the place where the fire occurred? The better opinion is to
understand them to mean on account of the fire, that is to say, that the
property was stolen because of the confusion produced by the fire, or the fear
resulting from it; just as we are accustomed to say "lost in war," with
reference to anything which is lost by reason of war.
Hence, if anything should be stolen from the fields near where the fire took
place, it must be said that there will be ground for the application of the
Edict, because it is true that it was stolen on account of the fire.
(3) Likewise, the term "destruction" refers to the time when the demolition of
the house took place, and not merely where anyone removed property from the
fallen building, but also if he removed any from the adjacent houses.
(4) If there was a suspicion of a fire, or of the demolition of a house, and
neither the fire nor the demolition occurred, let us see whether there will be
ground for the application of this Edict. The
better opinion is that there will be no ground for it, because nothing was
taken either on account of the fire, or the demolition of the house.
(5) The Praetor also says, "If anything is taken in a shipwreck," and, in this
instance, the question arises whether this means if anyone takes property at
the time of the shipwreck, or if he takes it at some other time, that is to
say, after the shipwreck has occurred; for anything cast upon the shore after a
shipwreck is said to belong to the vessel.
The better opinion is that this refers to the time of the shipwreck,
2. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XXI.As well as to the place.
3. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LVI.
Where anyone seizes property by violence in the place where the shipwreck
occurs or has occurred, he is held to come within the terms of this Edict. He,
however, who carries away articles cast upon the shore after the shipwreck has
happened is in such a position that he should rather be considered a thief than
liable under this Edict;'just as he who appropriates an article which has
fallen from a vehicle, and one who removes property cast upon the shore are not
considered to have taken it by force.
(1) Next, the Praetor says, "In an attack on a boat or a ship." He is
considered to take property by force who, during a battle or a combat directed
against a ship or a boat, either seizes it by violence, or does so while
robbers are capturing the vessel.
(2) Labeo says it is only just that, if anything is taken by violence during an
attack either upon a house in town or upon one in the country, there will be
ground for proceeding under this Edict, for we can be annoyed and attacked by
robbers no less upon the sea than upon the land.
(3) Not only he who has seized the property by force, but also he who received
it, is liable in the above-mentioned instances, because receivers of stolen
goods are not less guilty than the aggressors themselves. The word,
"fraudulently," has been added, however, for the reason that everyone who
receives property under such circumstances does not immediately become guilty,
but only he who receives it with fraudulent intent. But what if he received it
without knowing the facts? Or what if he received it for the purpose of taking
care of it, and keeping it safely for the person who lost it? He certainly
should not be held responsible.
(4) Not only he who took the property by force, but also he who removed it, or
set it aside with the intention of removing it, or injured it, or concealed it,
is liable in this action.
(5) It is, however, clear that it is one thing to take property by violence,
and another to secretly appropriate it, since anything can be secretly
appropriated without violence, but property cannot forcibly be taken without
the employment of violence.
(6) Anyone who takes property by violence from a ship which has run aground is
liable under this Edict. To run aground is what the Greeks term i^pa.6^.
(7) What the Prastor says with reference to causing damage only applies where
the damage has been committed maliciously, for if malice is absent, the Edict
will not be available. Hence, how must what Labeo stated be understood, namely:
if, for the purpose of protecting myself from a fire, which has broken out, I
demolish a building belonging to my neighbor, should an action be granted
against me, and my slaves? For, as I did this for the purpose of protecting my
own house, I certainly am free from malice. Therefore I think that what Labeo
said is not true. But can an action be brought under the Aquilian Law? I do not
think it can, for anyone who desires to protect himself does not act unjustly
when he cannot do otherwise. Celsus, also, was of the same opinion.
(8) In the time of Claudius, the following Decree of the Senate was enacted:
"If anyone, in a shipwreck, should remove the rudders of a vessel, or one of
them, he will be liable for taking the whole ship."
It was likewise provided by another Decree of the Senate that those by whose
fraud or advice shipwrecked persons were overcome by force, in order to prevent
assistance being given to the ship, or to anyone on board who was in danger,
would be liable to the penalties of the Cornelian Law relating to assassins.
And, moreover, that those who took by violence, or fraudulently obtained
anything from the wretched fortunes of the shipwrecked person, should be
compelled to pay as much into the Treasury as could be recovered by the Edict
of the Praetor.
4. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LIV.
Pedius says that he who seizes property by violence while the terror which
prevails during a shipwreck exists can be said to have taken it in the
shipwreck.
(1) The Divine Antoninus stated as follows, in a Rescript having reference to
those who are guilty of pillage during a shipwreck: "What you wrote me
concerning the shipwreck of a vessel or a boat was done for the purpose of
ascertaining what penalty I think should be inflicted upon those who have
stolen something from the vessel. I think that this can be easily determined,
for there is a great difference where persons take property which is about to
be lost, and where they criminally seize that which can be saved. Therefore, if
considerable booty appears to have been obtained by force, you will, after
conviction, banish freemen for three years, after having them whipped; or, if
they are of inferior rank, you will sentence them to labor on the public works
for the same time; and you will sentence slaves to the mines after having
scourged them. When the property is not of great value, you can discharge the
freemen, after having whipped them with rods; and the slaves, after having
scourged them. And, by all means, in other cases, as well as in those of this
description, the
condition of the persons and the nature of the property should be carefully
considered, in order that no more severity or indulgence may be exercised than
the circumstances demand."
(2) These actions are granted to heirs, as well as against them, according to
the amount of property which comes into their hands.
5. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XXI.
If anyone should remove by stealth, or take by violence anything which has been
rescued from a shipwreck, a fire, or the destruction of a house, and placed
elsewhere, he will be liable either to an action for theft, or to one for
property taken by violence; especially if he did not know that it came from a
shipwreck, a fire or the destruction of a building.
Where anyone carries away property which has been lost in a shipwreck, and is
lying on the shore where it was cast by the waves; many authorities hold the
same opinion, and it is correct, if some time intervened since the shipwreck
took place. Otherwise, if this occurred at the very time of the shipwreck, it
makes no difference whether the goods were taken from the sea itself or from
the wreck, or from the shore. We should make the same distinction where they
were taken from a boat or a vessel in distress.
6. Callistratus, On the Monitory Edict, Book I.
Aship is in distress when it is plundered, or submerged, or broken open, or has
a hole made in it, or its cables are cut, or its sails torn, or its anchors are
carried away by the sea.
7. The Same, Questions, Book II.
Many precautions have been taken to hinder property from being stolen during a
shipwreck, or to prevent strangers from coming in and taking possession of it.1
For the Divine Hadrian provided by
1 According to the old Common Law rule, a ship was not considered a wreck as
long as a human being, a dog, or a cat remained on board. "Concordatum est quod
wreckum maris non adjudicetur ubi homo, catus vel canis vivus evadit a navi."
(Fleta, Commentarius Juris Anglicani,I, 44.)
Where a vessel was wrecked, it, and everything taken therefrom, belonged to the
Crown, provided no claimant appeared before a year and a day had elapsed; the
property, in the meantime, remaining in the custody of the sheriff, bailiff, or
coroner of the district near which the disaster occurred. "The goods shall be
saved and kept by view of the sheriff, coroner, or the king's bailiff, and
delivered into the hands of such as are of the crown, where the goods were
found; so that if any sue for those goods, and after prove that they were his,
or perished in his keeping, within a year and a day, they shall be restored to
him without delay; and if not, they shall remain to the king." (Coke,
Institutes II, Stat, de West. Prim. IV.) Nothing could properly be considered
wrecked, in order to justify seizure by the Royal officials until it had come
ashore. Otherwise, it was either jetsam, flotsam,or ligan;and the presumption
existed that the owner had not voluntarily abandoned the property, and hence
would be entitled to it if he appeared and demanded it.
Stealing from a wreck, or a vessel in distress is, at present, far from being
regarded by the Criminal Law of England with that abhorrence which
characterized the offence when it was a felony without benefit of clergy. It is
classed with
an Edict that those who owned land on the shore of the sea should, when a ship
either badly damaged or broken up within the boundaries of any of them, see
that nothing was stolen from the wreck; and that the Governors of provinces
should grant actions against them in favor of those who were searching for the
property of which they had been deprived, to enable them to recover anything
which they could prove had been taken from them during the shipwreck, by those
who had possession of the same. With reference to such as are proved to have
taken the property, the Governor should impose a severe sentence upon them, as
upon robbers.
And in order to render proof of the commission of crimes of this kind more
easy, he permitted those who complained of having suffered any loss to go
before the Prefect and give their evidence, and search for the guilty parties,
in order that they might be sent before the Governor either in chains, or under
bond, in proportion to the gravity of their offences. He also directed that
security be taken from the owner of the property alleged to have been stolen
not to desist from the prosecution. The Senate also decreed that neither a
soldier, nor any private individual, nor a freedman, nor a slave of the
Emperor, should interfere in the collection of articles dispersed by shipwreck.
8. Neratius, Opinions, Book II.
If your boat has been carried by the force of the stream upon my land, you
cannot remove it, unless you give me security for any damage which may have
been caused by it.
9. Gaius, On the Law of the Twelve Tables, Book IV.
Anyone who sets fire to a house, or a pile of grain near a house, shall be
chained, scourged, and put to death by fire, provided he committed the act
knowingly and deliberately.1 If, however, it occurred
ordinary thefts, and renders the culprit liable to a maximum punishment of
fourteen years penal servitude. (Stephen, A Digest of the Criminal Law VI,
XXXIX, 325.) In the United States, a penalty of five thousand dollars and
imprisonment for ten years may be imposed. (Barnes, Federal Code, Sec.
9998.) --- ED.
1 In Wales, all damage resulting from arson had to be fully paid. "Whoever
burns a house, and by so doing sets fire to another, let him pay for the house
that took fire from the other, and so for every house as far as the fire may
extend." (Ancient Laws of Cambria; Laws of Howel the Good, Page 220.) The Salic
Law prescribed a fine of sixty-two solidi. "Si suis casam qualibet super
homines dormientes incenderit, quanti intus fuerint ingenui mallare debent, et
si aliquis intus arserit, LXH sol., de leude cc sol., cui casa est LXII sol.
culp iud." (Lex SalicaXVI.) Coke thus defines the crime of arson. "Burning is a
felony at the Common Law, committed by any that maliciously and voluntarily, in
the night or day, burneth the house of another." (Coke, Institutes III, XV.)
In England and France, the death penalty is incurred in case of the destruction
by fire of property belonging to the government, otherwise that of penal
servitude for life is inflicted. (Stephen, A Digest of the Criminal Law VI,
XLVII, 376, 377, Code Penal de France,Art. 434.)
Incendiarism in Spain is punished by imprisonment for from twelve years and a
day to life, the latter, unless the circumstances are usually aggravating,
being understood to terminate after the lapse of thirty years. The value of the
property destroyed is also taken into account by .the court, when sentence is
pronounced.
by accident, that is to say, through negligence, he shall be ordered to make
good the damage; or, if he is insolvent, he shall receive a light chastisement.
Every kind of building is included in the term house.
10. Ulpianus, Opinions, Book I.
The vigilance of the governors of provinces must be diligently exercised to
prevent fishermen from showing lights at night in order to deceive sailors,
thereby indicating that they are approaching some port, and in this way
bringing ships and those on board of them into danger, and .preparing for
themselves a detestable booty.
11. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIV.
Where a fire takes place by accident it is excusable, unless there was such
gross negligence as to resemble illegality or fraud.
12. Ulpianus, On the Duty of Proconsul, Book Vill.
It is established that anyone can collect his shipwrecked property, and this
was stated by the Emperor Antoninus and his Divine Father in a Rescript.
(1) Persons of low rank who designedly cause a fire in a town shall be thrown
to wild beasts, and those of superior station shall suffer death, or else be
banished to some island.

TITLE X. CONCERNING INJURIES AND INFAMOUS LIBELS.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LVI.
Something done contrary to law is designated an injury, for everything which is
illegal is held to be injurious. This, generally speaking, is the case, but,
specifically, an injury is defined to'be an insult. Sometimes, by the term
"injury" damage caused by negligence is meant, as we are accustomed to state in
the Aquilian Law. At other times, we call injustice an injury, as where anyone
has rendered a wrongful or inequitable decision, and this is styled an injury
because it is in violation of law and justice as not being legal. The term
"insult" is derived from the verb "to despise."
(1) Labeo says that an injury can be caused by a thing, or by words. By a
thing, when the hands are employed; by words, when the hands are not used, and
the outrage is committed by speech.1
(Codigo Penal de Espana,Arts. 562, 563, 564.) The law of Italy exhibits more
leniency, the penalty being from three to ten years imprisonment. (Codice
Penale del Regna d'ltalia,Arts. 300, 301.) --- ED.
1 The spiteful abuse of persons by name, known as convicium,was very common at
Rome, and led to the enactment of stringent laws against the practice; but it
was never carried to extremes as it was by the satirical dramatists of Greece,
who in their famous plays, did not hesitate to hold up to public ridicule and
execration the most prominent and respected members of the community. This
proceeding was so popular with the Athenian mob that, although it was
(2) Every injury involves either the person or the honor of him who is the
object of it, and has a tendency to render him infamous. It is directed against
the person, when he is beaten; against his honor, when a matron is deprived of
her attendant; and it tends to render anyone infamous when his or her modesty
is attacked.
(3) Again, an injury is committed against anyone by a person himself, or by
others: by the person himself, where it is committed directly against the head,
or the mother of a family; by others, where it is committed indirectly, as for
instance, against my children, my slaves, my wife, or my daughter-in-law. For
injury concerns us when it is directed against those who are subject to our
authority, or are entitled to our affection.
prohibited, the fine was nominal, and the law was seldom enforced. "No one
shall calumniate or defame any person while alive, in the temples, judicial
courts, treasuries, or places where games are celebrated. The delinquent herein
shall pay three drachms to the injured man, and two to the public treasury."
(Potter, Antiquities of Greece I, XXVI, Page 212.)
The Roman actio injuriarumwas of very extensive scope, and was applicable to
some illegal acts at present classed as public crimes, such as mayhem and
assault and battery, as well as to unjustifiable interference with personal
rights and privileges. The principal meaning of the term "injuria,"however, was
insult, and had reference to either a direct attack upon, or covert insinuation
against the reputation and honor of another. Malice and the legal capacity to
entertain it were essential to constitute the offence, the intention to injure
being absolutely essential, which was not the case under the Lex Aquilia,by
which law proceedings were authorized where the owner had suffered from the
negligence of some one that had resulted in damnum injuria,or wrongful damage
to his property, generally to one of his slaves.
As under the English and American law, truth could be pleaded by way of
justification, but the burden of proof was on the defendant to show that his
act had not been prompted by malice.
The distinction existing between spoken and written defamatory language under
the English law is thus concisely stated. "Libel is an offence as well as a
wrong, but slander is a civil wrong only." (Pollock, The Law of Torts, Page
229.) This does not apply to the ancient statutory crime of "scandalwm magna-
turn,"dating back to the time of Edward I, 1275, the punitive legislation
concerning which was designed to check the spread of any false rumors affecting
the reputation of the great magnates of the realm, including not only the high
officials of the Crown, but also the nobles, prelates, and all others whose
position by either birth or attainments rendered them conspicuous, and a target
for the abuse of the envious and malignant. (VidePike, History of Crime in
England, Vol. I, Page 398.) The enactment of this statute, while nominally for
the purpose of protecting the good name and dignity of persons eminent in
official or private life, but in fact to maintain the security of the
government and the integrity of the kingdom, was rendered necessary, as no
right of action for false and malicious imputations existed at Common Law, a
principle which afterwards was formally confirmed by Parliament.
(VideHoldsworth, A History of English Law, Vol. II, III, Pages 309, 315, 316.)
The old statutes defining and punishing the offence of scandalum magnatwmwere
repealed in 1887.
Bracton, in treating of injury, on which subject he, as in many other
instances, derives his precepts from the Civil Law, refers to insulting speech
and libellous poetry as being included in the offence. "Fit autem iniuria non
solum cum quis pugno percussus fuerit, verberatus, vulneratus, vel fustibus
ciesus, verum culm si conuitium dictum fuerit, vel de eo factmm carmen famosum
et huismodi." (De Legibus et Consuetudinibus Angliae,III, 36, 155.)
(4) If an injury is perpetrated against the body of a deceased person, of whose
estate we are the heirs, or the praetorian possessors, we can bring an action
for injury in our own name; for an injury committed in this manner involves our
reputation.
The same rule applies if the reputation of him whose heirs we are is attacked.
(5) Moreover, any injury committed against our children is an attack upon our
honor; so that, if anyone sells a son with his own consent, his father will be
entitled to an action for injury in his own name, but the son will not, because
no injury is committed against one who consents.
(6) Whenever an injury is committed against the funeral of a testator, or his
corpse, and this is done after the estate has been
Malice is presumed by the English law in all cases in which defamatory language
is used. (VidePollock, The Law of Torts, Page 255.)
The law of Scotland corresponds with that of England so far as pleading in
justification the truth of the alleged slanderous or libellous statements is
concerned, although it formerly was not the case. If this is not done when
issue is joined, it cannot be proved in mitigation of damages. "The law of
Scotland and England appears to be the same in regard to the competency of
pleading the veritas conviciiin defence." (Erskine, Principles of the Law of
Scotland III, Page 404.) Malice, which suggests deliberation, is not implied
when insulting language is used in a sudden quarrel. "When offensive words are
uttered in the heat of a dispute, and spoken to the person's face, the law does
not presume any malicious intention in the utterer." Where they are
deliberately and repeatedly uttered to the detriment of one's reputation the
contrary is true. "Where a person's moral character is thus attacked, the
animus injuriandiis commonly inferred from the injurious words themselves."
(Ibid., IV, Page 655.)
In the United States, it is the prevailing rule that the construction is all
important when any ambiguity exists which may render the words complained of
susceptible of more than one interpretation. The question whether it is a libel
or not is one for the court; its applicability to the plaintiff must be
determined by the jury. In both slander and libel malice is necessarily
presumed. (VideHilliard, The Law of Torts I, XIII, XIV, XV.)
The Spanish Code provides that a delinquent is both criminally and civilly
responsible for the perpetration of any offence. "Toda persona responsable
crimi-nalment de un delito 6 falta lo es tambien civilmente." (Codigo Penal de
Espana,Art. 18.) Scandalum magnatum,formerly recognized in England, is, so far
as applicable to public functionaries, severely punished in Spain. Abuse of, or
insult to the monarch, comes under the head of lese majeste.(Ibid., Arts. 161,
266.)
Slander is punishable as a crime under the Code of Italy by imprisonment for
from three to thirty months, and a fine of from one hundred to three thousand
lire.Libel incurs a penalty of from one to five years, and a fine of not less
than one thousand lire.In both instances, some act must be publicly attributed
to the aggrieved person which will expose him to public hatred, or affect his
honor or reputation. He is not allowed to plead the truth of the allegation by
way of defence. "Chiunque, communicando con piu persone riunite o anche
separate, attribuisce ad una persona un fatto determinato e tale da esporla al
disprezzo o all' odio pubblico e da offenderne I'onore o la riputazione, e
punito con la reclusione da tre a trenta mesi e con la multa da lire cento a
tremila.
"Se U delitto sia commesso in atto pubblico, o con scritti o disegni divulgati
o esposti al pubblico, o con altro mezzo di pubblicita, la pena e delta
reclusione da uno a cinque anni e della multa non inferiore alle lire mille."
(Codice Penale del Regno d'ltalia,Arts. 393, 394.)
The French law contains similar provisions. (Code Penal de France,Art.
373.) --- ED.
entered upon, it must be said that it is, to a certain extent, committed
against the heir, for it is always to the interest of the latter to protect the
reputation of the deceased. If it was committed before the estate was entered
upon, the action will rather be acquired by the estate, and transmitted by it
to the heir.
Finally, Julianus says, there is no doubt that if the body of the testator is
detained before the estate has been entered upon, the right of action will be
acquired by the estate. He also thinks that the same rule will apply if any
injury is committed against a slave belonging to the estate before it has been
entered upon, because the right of action is acquired by the heir through the
estate.
(7) Labeo says that if anyone, before the estate has been entered upon, strikes
a slave forming part of it, who has been manumitted by will, the heir can bring
an action for injury. But if he should be struck after the estate has been
entered upon, whether he knows that he is free or not, he can bring the suit.
(8) But whether he knows that it is my son or my wife, or whether he does not,
Neratius says that I will be entitled to this action in my name.
(9) Neratius also says that from one injury sometimes a right to proceed
against three persons will arise, and that the right of action of one is not
extinguished by that of another; as, for instance, when an injury has been
committed against my wife who is a daughter under paternal control, the action
for injury will lie in favor of me, of her father, and of the woman herself.
2. Paulus, On the Edict, Book L.
When an injury is committed against a husband, his wife cannot bring the
action, because it is proper for wives to be defended by their husbands, and
not husbands by their wives.
3. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LVI.
It is said, by way of reciprocity, that those who can suffer an injury can also
commit it.
(1) There are, however, some persons who cannot do this, for example, a
lunatic, and a minor who is not capable of criminality, since they can suffer
injuries but cannot commit them; for as an injury can only take place with the
intention of him who commits it, and the result will be that such persons,
whether they resort to blows, or use insulting language, are not considered to
have committed injury.
(2) Hence, anyone can suffer an injury without perceiving it, but he cannot
commit one unless he is aware of it, even if he does not know against whom it
is committed.
(3) Therefore, if anyone strikes another in jest, or while he is contending
with him, he will not be liable for committing an injury.
(4) When anyone strikes a freeman, thinking that he was his slave, he is in
such a position that he will not be liable to an action for injury committed.
4. Paulus, On the Edict, Book L.
If, when intending to strike my slave with my fist, I should unintentionally
strike you, while you were standing near him, I will not be liable for injury.
5. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LVI.
The Cornelian Law relating to injuries has reference to a person who wishes to
bring suit for injury, because he says that he has been struck and beaten, or
that his house has been entered by force. It is provided by this law that he
cannot, in such a case, preside as judge, who is either the son-in-law, father-
in-law, stepfather, stepson, cousin, or is any more nearly connected with the
plaintiff by either relationship or affinity, or who is the patron, or the
father of any of the abovementioned persons.
Therefore, the Cornelian Law grants an action for two causes, namely, where
anyone has been struck or beaten, or where his house has been forcibly entered.
Hence it is apparent that every injury which can be committed by the hands is
included in the Cornelian Law.
(1) The following difference exists between striking and beating, so Ofilius
says: to beat is to cause pain, to strike is to inflict blows without pain.
(2) We should understand the word "house" to be not merely one which is owned
by the plaintiff, but the one in which he resides. Therefore this law will be
applicable, whether the aggrieved person lives in his own house, or in one
which he has leased, or occupied gratis, or is one where he happens to be a
guest.
(3) When he lives in a house in the country, or one surrounded by gardens, what
should be done? The same rule should be adopted.
(4) If the owner should lease a tract of land, and it is entered by force, the
tenant, and not the landlord, can bring the action.
(5) Where, however, anyone enters the land of another which is cultivated by
the owner, Labeo denies that this action can be brought by the owner of the
land, under the Cornelian Law, because he cannot have his residence everywhere,
that is to say, in all his farmhouses.
I think that this law applies to every habitation in which the head of a
household resides, although he may not have his domicile there. For suppose
someone goes to Rome for the purpose of pursuing his studies, he certainly does
not reside at Rome, and still it should be said that if his house is entered by
force, there will be ground for the application of the Cornelian Law. Therefore
it does not apply to temporary lodgings, or to stables. It is, however,
applicable to those who remain in a place for a very short time, although they
may not have their domicile there.
(6) The question is asked, whether the head of a household can bring .the
action for injury under the Cornelian Law, if a son under his control has
sustained an injury. It has been decided that he cannot do so. This rule
applies in all cases. The praetorian action
for injury will, however, lie in favor of the father, and that of the Cornelian
Law in favor of the son.
(7) A son under paternal control can bring the action under the Cornelian Law
for any of these reasons, and he need not provide that his father will ratify
his act; for Julianus has stated that a son who brings an action for injury
under any other law cannot be compelled to give security for ratification.
(8) By this law, the plaintiff is permitted to tender the oath, in order that
the defendant may swear that he has not committed any injury. Sabinus, however,
in his work on Assessors, says that even Praetors must follow the example of
the law. And this is the fact.
(9) When a person writes anything for the purpose of defaming another, or
composes, or publishes it, or maliciously procures this to be done, even though
it may be published in the name of someone else, or without any name, he can be
prosecuted under this law, and if he should be convicted, he will be declared
incapable of testifying in court.
(10) He who publishes any inscriptions, or anything else, even if it is
written, for the purpose of libelling another, will incur the same penalty,
under the Decree of the Senate, as a person will who has caused any of these
things to be purchased, or sold.
(11) Anyone, whether he be free or a slave, who gives information of the guilty
party shall be rewarded by the judge in proportion to the wealth of the accused
person; and where the informer is a slave, he may, perhaps, be granted his
freedom. For why not, if the public welfare is promoted by his information?
6. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LV.
This Decree of the Senate is necessary, when the name of him against whom the
act was committed is not mentioned. Then, for the reason that proof is
difficult, the Senate wished that the crime should be punished by a public
prosecution. If, however, the name of the person is mentioned, he can bring
suit for injury under the Common Law, for he should not be prevented from
bringing a private action because it prejudices a public prosecution, as
private interests are concerned. It is evident that if a public prosecution is
instituted, a private action must be denied, and vice versa.
7. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LVII.
The Prsetor provides in his Edict as follows: "Anyone who brings an action for
injury must state positively what injury was sustained," because he who brings
an action which may render another infamous should not make a vague accusation
admitting of a distinction which may affect the good name of another, but he
must designate and specify clearly the injury which he alleges he has suffered.
(1) When it is said that a slave has been killed for the purpose of causing
injury, should not the Prsetor permit the public action to be prejudiced by the
private one of the Cornelian Law, just as if
anyone should desire to bring suit, because you gave poison for the purpose of
killing a man? He will, therefore, act more properly, if he does not grant an
action of this kind.
We are, however, accustomed to hold that, in cases which can be publicly
prosecuted, we ought not to be prevented from bringing private actions. This is
true only where the action which should be publicly prosecuted is not vitally
concerned. What, then, must we say with reference to the Aquilian Law, for this
action has principally reference to this? The slave who was killed was not the
principal object of the action which was brought mainly on account of the loss
sustained by his owner; but, in the action for injury, proceedings are
instituted with reference to murder and poisoning, for the purpose of
inflicting punishment, and not for reparation of damage. But what if anyone
should desire to bring the action for injury, because he has been struck on the
head with a sword ? Labeo says that he should not be prevented from bringing
it, as the case is not one which demands public punishment. This is not true,
for who doubts that the aggressor can be prosecuted under the Cornelian Law ?
(2) Besides, the nature of the injury which the person suffered must be
specifically stated, in order that we may ascertain whether judgment should be
rendered against a patron in favor of his freedman. For it must be remembered
that an action for injury is, not always but only occasionally, granted to a
freedman against his patron, where the injury he has sustained is atrocious;
for instance, if it is one which may be inflicted upon a slave.
Moreover, we allow a patron to inflict a light punishment upon his freedman;
and the Prsetor will not receive his complaint as having sustained an injury,
unless he is impressed by the atrocity of the act. For the Prsetor should not
permit the slave of yesterday who is the freedman of today to complain that his
master has insulted him, or struck him lightly, or corrected him. It will,
however, be perfectly just for the Prastor to come to his relief, if his master
has scourged him, or severely beaten him, or seriously wounded him.
(3) If one of several children, who are not subject to paternal authority,
desires to bring suit against his father, an action for injury cannot be rashly
instituted, unless the atrocity of the deed should induce this to be done, but
certainly those who are under paternal control are not entitled to this action,
even if the injury was atrocious.
(4) When the Prsetor says, "Must state positively what injury was sustained,"
how should this be understood? Labeo holds that he states anything positively
who mentions the name of the injury, without any ambiguity (for instance,
"either this or that"), but alleges that he has suffered such-and-such an
injury.
(5) If you inflict several injuries upon me, for example, where a disorderly
crowd having assembled, you enter my house, and in consequence I am insulted
and beaten at the same time; the question arises, can I bring separate actions
against you for each injury? Marcellus, in accordance with the opinion of
Neratius, approves of the
union in a single action of all the injuries that anyone has suffered at the
same time.
(6) Our Emperor stated in a Rescript that, at present, civil actions can be
brought for all kinds of injuries, even such as are of an atrocious character.
(7) We understand an atrocious injury to be one which is more than usually
insulting and serious.
(8) Labeo says that an atrocious injury is committed with reference to the
person, or the time, or the thing. An injury to the person becomes more
atrocious when it is committed against a magistrate, a parent, or a patron.
With reference to time, when it is committed at the games, and in public, or in
the presence of the Praetor, or in private, for he asserts that there is a
great difference, as an injury is more atrocious when it is committed in
public. Labeo says that an injury is atrocious with reference to the thing, as
for instance, where a wound is inflicted, or anyone is struck in the face.
8. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LV.
The size of the wound constitutes the atrocity, and sometimes the place where
it is inflicted, for example, when the eye is struck.
9. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LVII.
While we are discussing the point that the injury becomes atrocious on account
of the thing itself, the question arises whether, in order for it to be
atrocious, it must be inflicted upon the body, or whether it can be such if it
is not corporeal, for instance, where clothing is torn, or an attendant is
taken away, or insulting language is used.
Pomponius says that an injury can be called atrocious without inflicting a
blow, the atrocity being dependent upon the person.
(1) When, however, one person strikes and wounds another in the theatre or in
some other public place, he perpetrates an atrocious injury even though it is
not serious.
(2) It makes little difference whether the injury is inflicted upon the head of
a household, or on a son under paternal control, for it will be considered
atrocious.
(3) If a slave inflicts an atrocious injury and his master is present,
proceedings can be instituted against the latter. If his master is absent, the
slave should be delivered to the Governor, who shall cause him to be scourged.
When anyone makes immodest advances to either a woman or a man, or to a
freeborn person, or to a freedman, he will be liable to an action for injury.
If the modesty of a slave is attacked, the action for injury can be brought.
10. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LV.
The modesty of a person is said to be attacked when an attempt is made to
render a virtuous person depraved.
11. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LVII.
Not only is he liable to an action for injury who commits the injury, that is
to say, he who delivered the blow, but he also is in-
cluded who, either by malice or through his efforts, causes anyone to be struck
with the fist, for instance, upon the cheek.
(1) The action for injury is founded on right and justice. It is extinguished
by dissimulation; for if anyone should abandon an injury, that is to say, if,
after having suffered it, he does not recall it to mind, and should afterwards
repent of having neglected to do so, he cannot revive it. According to this,
equity is considered to abolish all apprehension of an action, whenever anyone
opposes what is just. Hence, if an agreement with reference to an injury is
entered into, or a compromise is made, or an oath is exacted in court, the
action for injury will not survive.
(2) Anyone can bring the action for injury either by himself or by another; as,
for example, by an agent, a guardian, or any other persons who are accustomed
to act in behalf of others.
(3) If an injury is committed against anyone by my direction, most authorities
hold that both I, who gave the order, and the person who received it, are
liable to the action for injury.
(4) Proculus very properly says that if I hire you to commit an injury, suit
can be brought against each of us, because the injury was committed by my
agency.
(5) He says that the same rule will apply, if I direct my son to commit an
injury against you.
(6) Atilicinus, however, says that if I persuade anyone to commit an injury who
otherwise would be unwilling to obey me, an action for injury can be brought
against me.
(7) Although the action for injury is not granted to a freedman against his
patron, it can be brought by the husband of a freedwoman, in her name, against
her patron; for the husband, when his wife has suffered any injury, is
considered to bring the action in her name; which opinion Marcellus accepts. I,
however, have made a note on him to the effect that I do not think that this
applies to every injury. For why should light chastisement of a freedwoman even
if she is married, or strong language, which is not obscene, be denied to a
person? But if the woman was married to a freedman, we should say that an
action for injury ought, by all means, to be granted to the husband against the
patron. This is the opinion of many authorities. Hence it is apparent that our
freedmen not only cannot bring an action for injury against us for injuries
inflicted upon themselves, but not even for such as are inflicted upon those
whom it is to their interest should not suffer injury.
(8) It is clear that if the son of a freedman, or his wife, should wish to
bring an action for injury sustained, this ought not to be refused them because
the action is not granted to the father or the husband, since they bring suit
in their own names.
(9) There is no doubt that anyone who is said to be a slave and asserts that he
is free can bring the action for injury against one who alleges that he is his
master. This is true, whether from being free he desires to introduce him into
slavery, or whether the slave wishes to obtain his freedom, for we use this law
without making any distinction.
12. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XXII.
When an action is brought to reduce anyone from freedom to servitude whom the
plaintiff knows to be free, and he does not do this on account of eviction, in
order to preserve it for himself; he will be liable to the action for injury.
13. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LVII.
The action for injury sustained is not granted in favor of, or against an heir.
The same rule applies where an injury has been inflicted upon my slave, for, in
this instance, the action for injury will not be granted to my heir. But after
issue has once been joined, this right of action passes even to successors.
(1) He who has recourse to a public law is not understood to do so for the
purpose of causing injury, for the execution of the law does not inflict
injury.
(2) Where anyone is arrested for not having obeyed the decree of the Praetor,
he is not in a position to bring suit for injury founded on the order of the
Praetor.
(3) If anyone should unjustly summon me before a tribunal of the magistrate, in
order to annoy me, I can bring the action for injury against him.
(4) If, when honors are to be conferred, anyone should not suffer this to be
done, as, for instance, where a statue, or something else of this kind has been
decided upon, will he be liable to the action for injury? Labeo says that he
will not be liable, even though he may do this for the sake of insult; for he
says it makes a great deal of difference where something is done by way of
insult, or where a person does not permit an act to be performed in honor of
another.
(5) Labeo also says that where one person was entitled to an embassy, and the
duumvir imposed this duty upon another, the action for injury cannot be brought
on the ground of labor enjoined; for it is one thing to impose a duty upon a
person, and another to inflict an injury upon him. This rule should be adopted
with reference to other offices and duties which are unjustly bestowed. Hence,
if anyone should render a decision for the purpose of causing injury, the same
opinion should prevail.
(6) No act of a magistrate performed by virtue of his judicial authority
renders the action for injury applicable.
(7) Where anyone prevents me from fishing, or casting a net in the sea, can I
bring the action for injury against him? Some authorities hold that I can do
so, and among them is Pomponius. The majority, however, hold that the case is
similar to that of a person who is not suffered to bathe publicly, or seat
himself in a theatre, or go into, sit down, or associate with others in any
public place, or where anyone does not permit me to make use of my own
property, for he can be sued in an action for injury.
The ancients granted an interdict to anyone who leased these public places, for
it was necessary to prevent force from being used against him by which he would
be unable to enjoy his lease.
But if I prevent anyone from fishing in front of my residence, or farm-house,
what must be said? Am I liable to an action for injury, or not? For the sea, as
well as the shore and the air, is common to all persons, and it has very
frequently been stated in rescripts that no one can be prevented from fishing,
or hunting birds, but he can be prevented from entering upon land belonging to
another. It has, nevertheless, improperly, and without the authority of law,
been assumed that anyone can be prohibited from fishing in front of my
residence or my farm-house; therefore, when anyone is prevented from doing so,
he can still bring the action for injury. I, however, can prevent anyone from
fishing in a lake which is my property.
14. Paulus, On Plautius, Book XIII.
It is evident that, where anyone has a private right to any part of the sea, he
will be entitled to the interdict Uti possidetis,if he should be hindered from
exercising it, as this relates to a private matter and not to a public one,
since the enjoyment of a right based on a private title, and not on a public
one, is involved; for interdicts have been introduced for private and not for
public reasons.
15. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXVII.
The question is also asked by Labeo, if anyone should alienate the mind of a
person by drugs, or by any other means, whether there will be ground for the
action for injury. He says that the action for injury can be brought against
him.
(1) Where a man has not been beaten, but hands have been threateningly raised
against him, and he has been repeatedly alarmed at the prospect of receiving
blows, without having actually been struck, the offender will be liable to an
equitable action for injury sustained.
(2) The Prsetor says: "I will grant an action against anyone who is said to
have abused another, or to have caused this to be done, in a way contrary to
good morals."
(3) Labeo says that vociferous abuse by several individuals constitutes an
injury.
(4) The expression, "Vociferous abuse by several individuals," is said to be
derived from the terms "tumult," or "assembly," that is to say the union of
several voices, for where those are united it receives this appellation, just
as if someone had said an "assembly of voices."
(5) But what is added by the Prsetor, that is to say, "Contrary to good
morals," shows that he noted not all the united clamor, but merely that which
violates good morals, and which has a tendency to render someone infamous, or
detested.
(6) He also says that the expression, "Contrary to good morals," should not be
understood to refer to those of the person who commits the offence, but, in
general, to mean in opposition to the morals of this community.
(7) Labeo says that the abusive clamor of many voices can not only be raised
against a person who is present, but also against one
who is absent. Hence, if anyone, under such circumstances, should come to your
house when you are not there, a clamor of many voices may be said to have
occurred. The same rule applies to your lodging, or to your shop.
(8) Not only is he considered to have caused a disturbance who has himself
uttered cries, but also he who has instigated others to cry out, or who has
sent them for that purpose.
(9) The words, "Abused another," were not added without a cause, for if the
clamor was raised against a person who was not designated, there could be no
prosecution.
(10) If anyone should attempt to incite a clamor against another, but does not
succeed, he will not be liable.
(11) From this it is apparent that every kind of abuse is not the clamor of
several voices, but that alone which is uttered with vociferation.
(12) Whether one or several persons have uttered these expressions in a
disorderly crowd, it is an united clamor. But anything which has not been
spoken in a tumultuous assemblage, or in loud tones, cannot properly be
designated an united clamor, but speech with a view to defamation.
(13) If an astrologer, or anyone who promises unlawful divination, after having
been consulted should say that another was a thief, when in fact he was not, an
action for injury sustained cannot be brought against him, but he can be
prosecuted under the Imperial Constitutions.
(14) The action for injury, which is based on general clamor, is not granted
either against or in favor of heirs.
(15) If anyone should speak to young girls who are attired in the garments of
slaves, he will be considered to be guilty of a minor offence; and still less,
if they are dressed as prostitutes, and not as respectable women. Therefore, if
a woman is not dressed as a respectable matron, anyone who speaks to her or
takes away her female attendant will not be liable to the action for injury.
(16) We understand an attendant to mean one who accompanies and follows anyone
(as Labeo says), whether it be a freedman or a slave, a man or woman. Labeo
defines an attendant to be one who is appointed to follow a person for the
purpose of keeping him or her company, and is abducted either in a public or a
private place. Teachers are included among attendants.
(17) He is considered to have a"bducted an attendant (as Labeo says), not where
he has commenced to do so, but where he has absolutely taken the attendant away
from his or her master or mistress.
(18) Moreover, he is not only understood to have abducted an attendant who does
so by the employment of force, but also he who persuades the attendant to leave
her mistress.
(19) Not only he who actually abducts an attendant is liable under this Edict,
but also anyone who addresses or follows one of them.
(20) To "address" is to attack the virtue of another by flattering words. This
is not raising a tumultuous clamor, but is a violation of good morals.
(21) He who makes use of foul language does not attack the virtue of anyone,
but is liable to the action for injury.
(22) It is one thing to address, and another to follow a person, for he
addresses a woman who attacks her virtue by speech; and he follows her who
silently and constantly pursues her, for assiduous pursuit is sometimes
productive of a certain degree of dishonor.
(23) It must, however, be remembered that everyone who follows or addresses
another cannot be sued under this Edict; for he who does this in jest, or for
the purpose of rendering some honorable service, will not come under the terms
of this Edict, but only he who acts contrary to good morals.
(24) I think that a man who is betrothed should also be permitted to bring this
action for injury; for any insult offered to his intended wife is considered an
injury to himself.
(25) The Prastor says: "Nothing shall be done for the purpose of rendering a
person infamous, and if anyone violates this provision, I will punish him
according to the circumstances of the case."
(26) Labeo says that this Edict is superfluous, because we can bring a general
action for injury committed, but it appears to Labeo himself (and this is
correct) that the Praetor, having examined this point, wished to call attention
to it specifically; for where acts publicly performed are not expressly
mentioned, they seem to have been neglected.
(27) Generally speaking, the Praetor forbade anything to be done which would
render anyone infamous; hence, whatever a person does or says, which has a
tendency to bring another into disrepute, will afford ground for an action for
injury sustained. Such are almost all those things which cause disgrace; as,
for instance, the use of mourning garments or clothing that is filthy, or
allowing the hair or the beard to grow, or the composition of poetry, or the
publication or singing of anything which may injure anyone's modesty.
(28) When the Praetor says, "If anyone violates this provision, I will punish
him according to the circumstances of the case," this should be understood to
mean that the punishment by the Praetor will be more severe; that is, that he
will be influenced either by the personal character of him who brings the
action for injury, or by that of him against whom it is brought, or by the
matter itself, and the nature of the injury as alleged by the plaintiff.
(29) If anyone attacks the reputation of another by means of a memorial
presented to the Emperor, or to anyone else, Papinianus says that the action
for injury can be brought.
(30) He also says that he who sells the result of a decision, before any money
has been paid, can be condemned for injury, after having been whipped by order
of the Governor, as it is apparent that he committed an injury against the
person whose judgment he offered for sale.
(31) Where anyone seizes the property of another, or even a single article, for
the purpose of causing him damage, he will be liable to an action for injury.
(32) Likewise, if anyone has given notice of the sale of a pledge, and states
that he is about to sell it, as having received it from me, and does this for
the purpose of insulting me, Servius says that an action for injury can be
brought.
(33) If anyone, in order to injure another should refer to him as his debtor,
when he is not, he will be liable, to the action for injury.
(34) The PraBtor says: "If anyone is said to have beaten the slave of another
contrary to good morals, or to have put him to torture without the order of his
master, I will grant an action against him. Likewise, where any other illegal
act is said'to have taken place, I will grant an action after proper cause is
shown."
(35) If anyone causes an injury to a slave in such a way as to inflict one upon
his master, I hold that the master can bring the action for injury in his own
name; but if he did not do this for the purpose of insulting the master, the
Praetor should not leave the injury done to the slave himself unpunished, and,
by all means, if it was effected by blows, or by torture; for it is clear that
the servant suffered by it.
(36) If one joint-owner beats a slave held in common, it is clear that he will
not be liable to this action, as he did this by the right of a master.
(37) If an usufructuary should do this, the owner can bring an action against
him; or if the owner did it, the usufructuary can sue him.
(38) He adds, "Against good morals," meaning that everyone who strikes a slave
is not liable, but everyone who strikes him against good morals is liable.
Where, however, anyone does so with a view to his correction or reformation, he
will not be liable.
(39) Therefore, if a municipal magistrate should wound my slave with a whip,
Labeo asks if I can bring suit against him because he beat him contrary to good
morals. And he says the judge should inquire what my slave did to cause him to
be whipped; as, if he impudently sneered at his office, or the insignia of his
rank, he should be discharged from liability.
(40) "To beat" is improperly applied to one who strikes with his fist.
(41) By "torture," we .should understand the torment and corporeal suffering
and pain employed to extract the truth. Therefore, a mere interrogation or a
moderate degree of fear does not justify the application of this Edict. In the
term "torment" are included all those things which relate to the application of
torture. Hence when force and torment are resorted to, this is understood to be
torture.
(42) If, however, torture should be applied by order of the master himself, and
it exceeds the proper limits, Labeo says he will be liable.
(43) The Praetor says, "Where any other illegal act is said to have taken
place, I will grant an action, after proper cause is shown." Hence, if a slave
has been severely beaten, or put to the question,
judgment can be rendered against the guilty party without any further
investigation. If, however, he suffered any other injury, the action will not
lie, unless proper cause is shown.
(44) Therefore the Praetordoes not promise the action for injury in the name of
the slave, for every kind of cause. For if he was lightly struck, or not
grossly abused, he will not grant it. If his reputation has been assailed by
any act, or by any written verses, I think that the investigation of the
Praetor should be extended so as to include the character of the slave. For
there is a great difference between the characters of slaves, as some are
frugal, orderly, and careful; others are common, or employed in menial
occupations, or of indifferent reputation. And what if the slave was shackled,
or of bad character, or branded with ignominy?
Therefore, the Praetor must take into consideration not only the injury which
was committed, but also the reputation of the slave against whom it is said to
have been perpetrated, and thus he will either permit or refuse the action.
(45) Sometimes the injury done to the slave falls back upon his master, and
sometimes it does not; for if anyone, thinking that he belonged to someone else
and not to me, should beat a man who alleged that he was free, and he would not
have beaten him if he had known that he was mine, Mela says that he cannot be
sued for having committed an injury against me.
(46) If anyone should bring an action for injury on account of a slave who had
been beaten, and afterwards an action for wrongful damage, Labeo says that this
is not the same thing, because one of the actions has reference to damage
caused by negligence, and the other to insult.
(47) If I have the usufruct in a slave, and you have the ownership in him, and
he has been beaten or subjected to torture, I, rather than the owner, will be
entitled to bring the action for injury sustained.
The same rule applies, if you have beaten my slave whom I possessed in good
faith, for the master has the better right to bring an action for injury.
(48) Again, when anyone beats a freeman who was serving me in good faith as a
slave, it should be ascertained whether he struck him for the purpose of
insulting me, and if he did, an action for injury will lie in my favor.
Therefore, we grant an action for injury with reference to the slave of another
who is serving me in good faith, whenever the injury was committed with the
intention of insulting me; for we grant it to the master of the name of the
slave himself. If, however, he touches and beats me, I can also bring an action
for injury. The same distinction must be made with reference to the
usufructuary.
(49-) If I beat a slave belonging to several masters, it is perfectly clear
that they all will be entitled to bring the action for injury sustained.
16. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XLV.
It is not just, however, as Pedius says, that judgment should be rendered for a
larger sum than the value of the share of the owner, and therefore it is the
duty of the judge to make an estimate of the different shares.
17. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LVII.
If, however, I have done this with the permission of one alone, and thinking
that he was the sole owner of the slave, the action for injury will not lie in
favor of anyone. If I knew that the slave belonged to several persons, the
action will not lie in favor of the owner who permitted me to strike the slave,
but it will lie in favor of the others.
(1) Where torture has been inflicted by order of a guardian, an agent, or a
curator, it must be said that the action for injury will not
lie.
(2) My slave was scourged by our magistrate at your solicitation, or upon your
complaint. Mela thinks that an action for injury should be granted me against
you for an amount which may seem to the court to be equitable. And Labeo says
that if the slave should die, his master can bring suit, because damage
committed by means of injury is involved. This opinion was adopted by
Trebatius.
(3) Some injuries inflicted by freemen seem to be slight and of no importance,
but when inflicted by slaves they are serious; for the insult increases on
account of the person who offered it.
(4) When a slave inflicts an injury, it is clear that he commits an offence.
Therefore, it is reasonable, as in the case of other crimes, that a noxal
action for damages sustained should be granted under such circumstances. The
master, however, if he prefers to do so, can bring the slave into court in
order to have him whipped, and in this way satisfy the person who sustained the
injury. It will not be necessary for the master to give him up to be whipped,
but the power will be granted him to surrender his slave for that purpose; or
if the injured party is not satisfied- with having him whipped, the slave
should be surrendered by way of reparation, or the amount of damages appraised
in court should be paid.
(5) The Praetor says, "In the discretion of the judge," which means that of a
good citizen, in order that he may impose the measure of the punishment.
(6) If, before the master produces the slave in court to be whipped, in order
to satisfy the complainant, this having been done by the authority of a -
magistrate, the plaintiff afterwards should insist upon bringing an action for
injury, he should not be heard, for he who has received satisfaction has
abandoned the injury he sustained; for if he acted voluntarily, it may
undoubtedly be said that the right of action for injury will be extinguished no
less than if it had been annulled by lapse of time.
(7) If a slave should inflict an injury by the order of his master, the latter
can certainly be sued, even in his own name. Where, however, it is stated that
the slave has been manumitted, it is held by
Labeo that an action can be granted against him, because the injury follows the
person, and a slave should not obey his master in all things. But if he should
kill anyone by order of his master, we exempt him from the operation of the
Cornelian Law.
(8) It is clear when he commits some act for the purpose of defending his
master, that he has reason in his favor, and that he can plead an exception if
he is prosecuted for what he has done.
(9) If the slave, in whom I have the usufruct, commits an injury against me, I
can bring a noxal action against his owner, nor should my condition be rendered
any worse because I have only an usufruct in him, than if I did not have it.
The rule is otherwise where the slave is owned in common, for then we will not
grant an action to the other joint-owner, for the reason that he himself is
liable to one for injury.
(10) The Praetor says: "If someone is alleged to have committed an injury
against a person who is under the control of another, and he to whose authority
he is subject, or anyone who can act in his name as agent is not present, I
will, upon proper cause being shown, grant an action to him who is said to have
sustained the injury."
(11) When a son under paternal control has suffered an injury, and his father
was present, but cannot bring suit on account of being insane, or because of
some other affection of the mind, I think that an action for injury will lie;
for in this instance the father is considered as being absent.
(12) If the father is present, but is unwilling to bring suit, either because
he wishes to postpone it, or abandon, or pardon the injury, the better opinion
is that the right of action should not be granted to the son; for, when the
father is absent, the action is granted to the son for the reason that it is
probable that his father would have brought it if he had been present.
(13) Sometimes, however, we think that even if the father excuses the injury,
the action should be granted to the son, for instance, if the character of the
father is vile and abject, and that of the son is honorable; for a father who
is extremely contemptible should not estimate the insult offered to his son by
his own degradation. Suppose, for example, the father to be a person for whom,
by law and reason, a curator should be appointed by the Praetor.
(14) If, however, the father, after issue has been joined, should depart or
neglect to prosecute the case, or is of inferior rank, it must be said that the
right of action can be transferred to the son, if proper cause is shown.
The same rule will apply where the son is emancipated.
(15) The Praetor gave the preference to the agent of the father over the
persons themselves who suffered the injury. When, however, the agent neglects
the case, is in collusion with the other parties, or is not able to prosecute
those who have committed the injury, the action will rather lie in favor of him
who suffered it.
(16) We understand an agent to be not a person who has been specially appointed
an attorney to conduct an action for injury, but
it will be sufficient if the administration of all the property has been
entrusted to him.
(17) Where, however, the Praator says that if proper cause is shown an action
will be granted to him who is said to have sustained the injury, this must be
understood to mean that when the investigation is made, it must be ascertained
how long the father has been absent, and when he is expected to return, and
whether the person who desires to bring suit for injury is indolent, or
altogether worthless, and not capable of transacting any business, and on this
account is not fitted to bring this action.
(18) When he afterwards says, "Who has sustained the injury," this must
sometimes be understood to mean that his father will be entitled to bring the
action; for instance, where the injury has been inflicted upon a grandson, and
his father was present, but his grandfather was not. Julianus says that the
action for injury should be granted to the father rather than to the grandson
himself, for he holds it is the duty of the father, even while the grandfather
is living, to protect his son against everything.
(19) Julianus also says that the son can not only bring the action himself, but
can also appoint an attorney to do so. Otherwise, he says, if we do not permit
him to appoint an attorney, and he should happen to be prevented from appearing
by illness, and there is no one to conduct the action for injury, it must be
dismissed.
(20) He also says that when an injury is inflicted upon a grandson, and there
is no one to bring suit in the name of the grandfather, the father should be
permitted to do so, and can appoint an attorney; for the power of appointing an
attorney is conceded to all those who have the right to bring suit in their own
names. Moreover, he asserts that a son should be considered as bringing the
action in his own name, for, when his father fails to do so, the Praetor will
give him permission to bring it.
(21) If a son under the control of his father brings the action for injury, it
will not lie in favor of his father.
(22) He also says that an action on account of injury is granted to a son under
paternal control when there is no one who can act in the name of the father,
and that, in this instance, he is considered the head of the household.
Wherefore, if he has been emancipated, or should be appointed a testamentary
heir, or even if he is disinherited or has rejected his father's estate,
authority to conduct the case shall be granted him; for it would be perfectly
absurd that anyone, whom the Prater would permit to bring the action, while he
was under the control of his father, should be rendered incapable of avenging
his injuries, after he had once become the head of a household, and that this
privilege should be transferred to his father, who had abandoned him as far as
it was in his power to do so; or (which is still more improper) if it should be
transferred to the heirs of the father, who, there is no doubt, are not in any
way interested in an injury inflicted upon a son under paternal control.
18. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LV.
It is neither proper nor just for anyone to be condemned for speaking ill of a
person who is guilty; for it is both necessary and expedient for the offences
of guilty persons to be known.
(1) When one slave inflicts an injury upon another, an action should be brought
just as if'he had injured his master.
(2) If a daughter under paternal control, who is married, should sustain an
injury, both her husband and her father can bring the action for injury.
Pomponius very properly holds that judgment against the defendant should be
rendered in favor of the father for an amount equal to what it would have been
if she were a widow; and in favor of the husband, for the same amount, just as
if she was independent; because the injury sustained by each party has its own
distinct valuation. Therefore, if the married woman is under no one's control,
she cannot bring the action, because her husband can bring it in her name.
(3) If an injury should be inflicted upon me by someone to whom I am unknown,
or if anyone thinks that I am Lucius Titius, when I am Gaius Seius, the
principal matter here will have the preference, that is, the fact that he
desired to injure me. For I am a certain individual, although he may think that
I am some other person than myself, and therefore I will be entitled to an
action for injury.
(4) But when anyone thinks that a son under paternal control is the head of a
household, he cannot be considered to have committed an injury against the
father of the latter any more than against the husband, if he believes his wife
to be a widow, because the injury is not personally aimed at the parties
concerned, and cannot be transferred from their children to them by a mere
effort of the mind; since the intention of him who inflicts the injury does not
extend beyond the aggrieved person, who is regarded as the head of the
household.
(5) If, however, he was aware that he was a son under paternal control, but
still did not know whose son he was, I would hold (so he says) that the father
could bring an action for injury in his own name, just as a husband could do,
if he knew that the woman was married; for he who is aware of these things
intends to inflict an injury through the son, or the wife, upon any father or
husband whomsoever.
19. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XXII.
If my creditor, whom I am ready to pay, should attack my sureties for the
purpose of injuring me, he will be liable to an action for injury.
20. Modestinus, Opinions, Book XII.
If Seia, for the purpose of inflicting injury, seals up the house of her absent
debtor, without the authority of the magistrate who has the right and the power
to allow this, he gave it as his opinion that the action for injury could be
brought.
21. Javolenus, Epistles, Book IX.
The estimate of the injury sustained should not date from the time when
judgment was rendered, but from the time when the injury was committed.
22. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Prastor, Book I.
If a freeman is arrested as a fugitive slave, he can bring an action for injury
against the person who seizes him.'
23. Paulus, On the Edict, Book IV.
Ofilius says that anyone who enters the house of another against the will of
the owner, even though the latter may be summoned to court, he will be entitled
to an action for injury against him.
24. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Prsetor, Book XV.
Where anyone is prevented by another from selling his own slave, he can bring
an action for injury sustained.
25. The Same, On the Edict, Book XVIII.
If anyone should have intercourse with a female slave, an action for injury
will be granted to her master, but if he conceals the slave, or does something
else with the intention of stealing, he will also be liable to an action for
theft; or, if anyone should have intercourse with a young girl who was not
mature, some authorities think that the action under the Aquilian Law will also
lie.
26. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XIX.
If anyone makes a laughing-stock of my slave or my son, even with his consent,
I will still be considered to have sustained an injury; as, for instance, if he
takes him to a tavern, or induces him to throw dice. This will always be the
case when the person who persuades him does so with the intention of injuring
me. However, evil advice may be given by one who does not know who the master
is, and hence the action for corrupting a slave becomes necessary.
27. The Same, On the Edict, Book XXVII.
If the statue of your father, erected on his monument, is broken by having
stones thrown at it, Labeo says that an action for violating a tomb cannot be
brought, but that one for injury can.
28. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXIV.
The action for injury does not affect our property until issue has been joined.
29. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book X.
If you manumit or alienate a slave, on whose account you are entitled to an
action for injury, you will retain the right to bring- the action.
30. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLII.
Who doubts that, after a slave has been manumitted, an action will not lie for
an injury which he sustained while in servitude?
(1) If an injury has been inflicted upon a son, while the right of action will
be acquired by the son as well as the father, the same estimate should not be
made for both:
31. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book II.
As the injury done to the son may be greater than that done to the father, on
account of the superior rank of the former.
32. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLII.
Magistrates are not allowed to do anything by which an injury may be caused.
Therefore, if a magistrate, either as a private individual, or in his
magisterial capacity, is instrumental in committing injury, he can be sued for
injury. But will it be necessary to wait until he has relinquished his office,
or can the suit be brought while he still holds it? The better opinion is, that
if he is a magistrate who cannot legally be summoned to court, it will be
necessary to wait until he relinquishes his office. If, however, he is one of
the inferior magistrates, that is to say, one of those not invested with
supreme jurisdiction or authority, he can be sued, even while he is still
discharging his judicial duties.
33. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book X.
When anything is done in compliance with the dictates of morality for the
purpose of protecting the interests of the State, and this causes anyone to be
insulted, nevertheless, for the reason that the magistrate did not act with the
intention of causing injury, but had in view the vindication of the majesty of
the Republic, he will not be liable to an action for injury.
34. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XIII.
Where several slaves together have beaten someone, or have raised a tumultuous
clamor against him, each of them, individually, is guilty of the offence, and
the injury is all the greater, since it was committed by slaves; and, indeed,
there are the same number of injuries as there are persons responsible for
them.
35. Ulpianus, On All Tribunals, Book III.
Where anyone commits an atrocious act who can, on account of his infamous
character and poverty, disregard a judgment rendered against him in an action
for injury, the Prater should exercise all his severity in the prosecution of
the case, and the punishment of those who committed the injury.
36. Julianus, Digest, Book XLV.
If I desire to bring an action in the name of a son against his father, and the
latter appoints an attorney, the son is not considered
to be defended unless he gives security for the payment of the judgment; and
therefore an action should be granted against him just as if he was not
defended by his father.
37. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIV.
It is provided by the Imperial Constitutions that anything placed upon public
monuments for the purpose of defaming another shall be removed.
(1) The action for injury can even be brought civilly under the Cornelian Law,
and the amount of the judgment be estimated by the judge.
38. Scsevola, Rules, Book IV.
It is provided by a decree of the Senate that no one shall carry the statue of
the Emperor for the purpose of exciting odium against anyone, and that he who
violates it shall publicly be placed in chains.
39. Venuleius, Public Prosecutions, Book II.
No one is permitted to wear filthy clothing or long hair in public under the
name of an accused person, unless he is so closely connected with him by
affinity that he cannot be compelled to testify against him in opposition to
his will.
40. Macer, Public Prosecutions, Book II.
The Divine Severus wrote to Dionysius Diogenes, as follows: "Anyone who has
been condemned for an atrocious injury cannot belong to the Order of Decurions;
and the error of a governor or of anyone else who has rendered a different
decision on the point in controversy will not benefit you, nor will that of
those who, in opposition to the established law, held that you still retained
your membership in the Order of Decurions."
41. Neratius, Parchments, Book III.
A father, against whose son an injury has been committed, should not be
prevented from bringing suit for his own injury and that of his son, by two
different proceedings.
42. Paulus, Sentences, Book V.
Parties who are conducting a case should not raise their voices against the
judge, otherwise they will be branded with infamy.
43. Gaius, Rules, Book III.
Anyone who brings an action for injury against another for the purpose of
annoyance shall be condemned by extraordinary proceedings, that is to say he
shall either suffer exile, deportation, or expulsion from his order.
44. Javolenus, On the Last Works of Labeo, Book IX.If the owner of a lower
house causes smoke to affect the building of his neighbor above him, or if a
neighbor occupying a higher house
throws or pours anything upon that of another, which is situated below, Labeo
says that an action for injury cannot be brought.
I think that this is not true provided it was thrown down upon the neighbor's
premises for the purpose of injuring him.
45. Hermogenianus, Epitomes, Book V.
So far as injuries are concerned, it is customary at present to pass sentence
arbitrarily, according to the circumstances and the person.
Slaves who have been scourged are restored to their masters; freemen of
inferior ranks are whipped with rods; and others are punished either with
temporary exile, or by the interdiction of certain property.

TITLE XI. CONCERNING THE ARBITRARY PUNISHMENT OF CRIME.

1. Paulus, Sentences, Book IV.
The seducers of married women, as well as other disturbers of the marital
relation, even though they may be unable to consummate their crimes, are
punished arbitrarily on account of the tendency of their destructive passions.
(1) An injury is committed against good morals, for instance, where one person
throws manure upon another, or smears him with filth, or mud; or defiles water,
canals, or reservoirs; or fouls anything else for the purpose of injuring the
public; and upon persons of this kind it is customary to inflict the most
condign punishment.
(2) Anyone who persuades a boy to submit to lewdness, either by leading him
aside, or by corrupting his attendant, or anyone who attempts to seduce a woman
or a girl, or does anything for the purpose of encouraging her in debauchery
either by lending his house, or by paying her money, in order to persuade her,
and the crime is accomplished, shall be punished with death, and if it is not
accomplished, he shall be deported to some island. Attendants who have been
corrupted shall suffer the extreme penalty.1
2. Ulpianus, Opinions, Book IV.
Unlawful assembles must not be attempted, even by veteran soldiers, under the
pretext of religion, or that of performing a vow.
1 The crime against nature is severely condemned by the Canon Law. "Contra
naturam verb s&mper illicitus, & procul dubio flagitiosior atque turpior;
quern, sanctus Apostolus & in fceminis, & in masculis arguebat; damnabiliores
volens intelligi, quam si in vsu naturali vel adulterando, vel fornicando
peccarent." (Corpus Juris Canonici, Decreti Secunda,Pars. XXXII, XIV.)
Zoroaster denounced this crime as inexpiable. (Avesta, Vendidad, Page 72.)
Among the Jews it was a capital offence. "If a man also lie with mankind, as he
lieth with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination; they shall
surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them." (Leviticus, XX, 13.)
The Visigothic Code denounces psederasty as "Scelus detestatum semper et
execrabile,"and prescribes the immediate castration of both participants as the
3. The Same, On Adultery, Book III.
The actions for embezzlement and the exploitation of estates include an
accusation, but they are not criminal prosecutions.
4. Marcianus, Rules, Book I.
The Divine Severus and Antoninus stated in a Rescript that a woman who
purposely produces an abortion on herself should be sentenced to temporary
exile by the Governor; for it may be considered dishonorable for a woman to
deprive her husband of children with impunity.1
penalty, "Ubi scilicet max tale nefas admissum index evidenter investigaverit,
utrosque continue castrare procuret." (Forum JudicumIII, V, V.)
Mohammed also made it capital. (Koran, Sura V, 57.) Both the guilty parties
undergo the same penalty if they are of age; but if one is a minor, his youth
and weakness are taken into account.
"Si deux personnes majeures se livrent ensemble a la pederastie, elles
encourent toutes deux la peine de mort."
"Quand un majeur com/met I'acte de pederastie sur un mineur, le premier seul
est puni de mort; le mineur est soumis a, une correction, mais non a une
peine."(Tornauw, Le Droit Musulman,Page 296.)
The old English law sentenced persons who had committed sodomy to be buried
alive, when caught flagrante delicto. "Sodomitx in terra, vivi confodiantur,
dum to/men man' oper' capti per testimonium legate vel publice convicti."
(Fleta, Commentarius Juris AnglicaniI, 37.) In Scotland they were hanged.
(Mackenzie, The Laws'and Customes of Scotland in Matters Criminal, XIV, III.)
The punishment of sodomy in England, at present, is penal servitude for from
ten years to life. (Stephen, A Digest of the Criminal Law, IV, XVIII, 168.)
The statutes of the various States of the Union prescribe fines and terms of
imprisonment at hard labor with varying degrees of severity.
Spanish jurisprudence does not recognize sodomy as a crime, when it takes place
between adults, by common consent. In France and Italy it is classed as an
outrage against good morals, but must be perpetrated in public to render anyone
liable to prosecution, unless force is employed, or the aggressor is of full
age, is an ascendant, or occupies a position of trust. (Code Penal de
France,Arts. 330-334.) (Codice Penale del Regna d'ltalia,Arts. 331-340.) The
German law establishes penalties of from six months to ten years, according to
circumstances. (Strafgesetzbuch fur das Deutsche Reich,Arts. 175, 176.) The
punishment in Austria is imprisonment at hard labor for from one to five years.
(Allgemeines Strafgesetz,Arts. 130, 131, 132.) --- ED.
1 Jurists, at different periods of Roman history, entertained diametrically
opposite opinions of the criminal responsibility attaching to the production of
abortion. It was originally permitted under certain circumstances, on the
ground that a woman had the right to dispose of any part of her body at her
pleasure, and also because it was generally held that the foetus, not being as
yet possessed of a soul, did not become a human being until, at maturity, it
was brought into the world.
These were Grecian doctrines, advocated by Aristotle, Plato, Zeno, and other
philosophers. Strictly speaking, the mother was not herself authorized to
perform the operation; the father, if living, was invested with that privilege
as the head of the household; this being only another instance of the exercise
of the patria potestas,which gave him the right of life or death over his
offspring.
The advent of Christianity brought with it new and hitherto unknown
responsibilities concerning the premature disposal of children in uteroby
violence, and effectually abrogated the pagan theory of the non-existence of
the soul before birth. Many nice questions of casuistry were propounded and
argued with refer-
5. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book V.
In addition to liability to the action for corrupting a slave, which is
authorized by the Perpetual Edict, anyone at whose instigation a slave is
proved to have sought sanctuary at the foot of a statue, for the purpose of
defaming his master, shall be severely punished.
6. The Same, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book Vill.
Those who are accustomed to embrace every opportunity to increase the price of
food are called dardanarii,and provision has been made by the Imperial Decrees
and Constitutions for the repression of their avarice. It is provided as
follows in the Decrees: "Moreover,
ence to these matters by the Fathers of the Church, and the subservient
emperors, influenced largely by political considerations, enacted many savage
laws for the purpose of putting an end to the practice. These efforts, however,
proved unavailing, for even the penalty of death was not sufficient to check
the constantly increasing tendency of all classes to limit the size of their
families, and abortion became more frequent under the Christian emperors than
it had been under their heathen predecessors. Thus, in ancient, as in modern
times, the attempt to inculcate and enforce morality by statute, in defiance of
the prevailing sentiment of the community, has always resulted in conspicuous
failure. Only a few generations ago, abortion was considered in most countries
as deliberate homicide, rendering even a prospective mother liable to capital
punishment.
This was the rule in Old Castile, and applied as well to the woman, if
implicated, as to anyone else; provided the foetus was living. If it was dead,
the penalty was banishment for the term of five years. "Muger prenada, que
beuiere yeruas a sabiendas, o otro cosa qualguier, con que echasse de si la
criatura, o se firiesse con punos en el vientre, o con otra cosa, con intencion
de perder la criatura, e se perdiesse porende, dezimos, que si era ya biua en
el vientre estonce, quando ella esto.fiziere, que deue morir par ello. Fueras
ende, si gelo fiziessen fazer por fuerca, assi como fazen los Judios a sus
Moras; ca estonce, el que lo fizo fazer deue auer la pena, E si por auentura
non fuesse aun biua, estonce non le deuen dar muerte por ello; mas deue ser
desterrada en albuna Isla por cinco anos. Essa misma pena, dezimos, que deue
auer el ome que fiere a su muger a sabiendas, seyendo ella prenada, de manera
que se perdiesse lo que tenia en el vientre, por la ferida. Mas si otro ome
estrano lo fiziesse, deue auer pena de omicida, si era biua la criatura, quando
mouio por culpa del; e si non era aun biua, deue ser desterrado en alguna Isla
por cinco anos." (Las Siete PartidasVII, Vill, Vill.) From this law it is
evident that the Jews were adepts in this illegal practice.
The same doctrine prevailed at Common Law. "Qui etiam mulxrem prxgnan-tem
oppresserit, vel venenum dederit vel percusserit ut faciat abortivum, vel non
concipiat, si fcstus erat jam formatus & animatus, recte homicida est."(Fleta,
Commentarius Juris AnglicaniI, 10.)
Some nations went so far as to even punish abortion induced in animals, by
requiring others of equal value to be given in return for those injured or
killed.
"Si quis quocumque pacta partum equie prxgnantis excusserit, pulletrum
anniculum UK, cuius fuerat, mox reformet."
"Si quis vaccam prsegnantem abortare fecerit alienam, talem aliam cum vitulo
domino reformare cogatur, et illam, cui partum excussit, ipse accipiat. Hsec et
de aliis quadrupedibus forma servetur." (Forum JudicumVill, IV, V, VI.)
Mohammed made no reference to abortion in the Koran, hence it is not considered
a crime under Moslem law, although certain legal writers have held that it is
prohibited after the child has passed the embryonic stage.
The Russian Imperial Penal Code prescribed confinement in a house of correction
for this offence, when the woman herself had committed it, and when a physician
or a midwife was responsible, the magistrate could deprive them of the
you should take care that there are no dardanariiof any kind of goods, and that
they do not adopt measures for storing away merchandise which they have
purchased; or, that the more wealthy of them may not be unwilling to dispose of
their goods at reasonable prices in
right to practice their profession for from one to five years. (Code Penal
Russe,Arts. 461, 466.)
The laws of Japan exhibit great indulgence toward offenders of this
description.
"Every woman enceintewho shall have procured abortion by the administration of
drugs or by the aid of any other means shall be punished with penal servitude
for a period not exceeding one year."
"Whosoever shall have procured abortion for a woman at the request or upon the
consent of the said woman, shall be punished with penal servitude for a period
not exceeding two years."
"Whosoever has thereby caused death or injury to the woman shall be punished
with penal servitude for a period not exceeding five years." (Criminal Code of
Japan, Arts. 249, 250.)
Among the Anglo-Saxons, abortion does not appear to have been a violation of
the secular law, but an offence against the canons of the Church to be atoned
for by contribution and penance.
Under English law the abortionist is still treated with almost mediaeval
severity, and may be sentenced to penal servitude for life. (Stephen, A Digest
of the Criminal Law V, XXV, 236.)
It is a felony in most of the States of the Union, punishable at hard labor for
a term of years.
Despite these drastic, and not infrequently barbarous regulations, abortion is
steadily on the increase everywhere, a fact probably, to a large extent,
attributable to the general ignorance of methods to prevent conception, the
employment of which is also subject to the unqualified reprobation of the law,
with equal futile results. Reliable medical statistics prove that although the
production of abortion during the decadence of the Roman Empire was so
universal as to provoke the animadversion of both moralists and satirical
writers alike, this condition, deplorable as it may have been, is,
nevertheless, far surpassed by the prevalence of the crime among civilized
nations of the present age. It does not exist to such an appalling degree in
Spain, Italy, and Scandinavia; but in Germany, France, and England it is so
frequent as to have had attention called to its increase and the prospective
danger to the race by writers in numerous medical publications, and to have
become a question of natural concern. The constantly decreasing birth rate in
France, mainly attributable to this practice, is said by competent authority to
have been one of the indirect causes of the recent war. One French woman, after
conviction, confessed to having produced two thousand operations of this kind
in eight years, an average of more than one hundred a month during that time.
Some years ago it was positively ascertained that there were at least seventeen
abortions to every hundred pregnancies in the United States. When it is taken
into consideration that by far the greater majority of such cases, whether due
to the instrumentality of physicians, or the acts of unprofessional persons
possessed of little or no medical knowledge, never are disclosed, some idea may
be formed of the extent of the evil. One eminent practitioner has alluded to
the "countless thousands" of cases which never come to light. Primitive races
are not usually given to this pernicious practice; it is among the most highly
cultivated and learned that it attains its greatest- development. Its fatal
tendency, and the inefficiency of legislation to restrain or suppress it, is
thus stated in a brief but comprehensive manner by one of the greatest of
modern writers on this subject. ' "Whenever abortion becomes a social custom,
it is the external manifestation of a people's decadence, and far too deeply
rooted to be cured by the mere attempt to suppress the external manifestation."
(Balestrini, Aborto, Infanticidio ed Espo-sizione d'lnfante,Page 191.) --- ED.
expectation of an unproductive season, so that the price of food may not be
raised.
The punishments imposed upon such persons, however, vary greatly, for
generally, if they are merchants, they are only prohibited from engaging in
trade, and sometimes they are deported, but those of low rank are condemned to
the public works.1
(1) The price of food is also increased by the use of false balances, with
reference to which the Divine Trajan promulgated an Edict, by which Edict he
renders such persons liable to the penalty of the Cornelian Law; just as if
under that section of this law, which has reference to wills, anyone had been
condemned for having written, sealed, or published a forged testament.
(2) The Divine Hadrian also condemned to deportation anyone who had false
measures in his possession.
7. The Same, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book IX.
Persons who carry bags, and make use of them for forbidden purposes, by
purloining or carrying away portions of property, and also those called
derectarii,that is to say, such as introduce themselves into apartments with
the intention of stealing, should be punished more severely than ordinary
thieves, and therefore they are sentenced for a term to the public works, or
are scourged and then discharged, or are deported for a certain time.
8. The Same, In the Same Book.
There are, besides, crimes over which the Governor has jurisdiction; as,
wherever anyone alleges that documents belonging to him
1 The dardanariusof Roman times is the "profiteer" of the present day; which
only proves that the offence is as old as human selfishness and greed. There
were several different methods of securing a monopoly of provisions at Common
Law, known as forestalling, regrating, and engrossing, the two last having been
originally included in the term forestalling.
The engrosser was one who sold in gross, that is to say, a wholesale merchant.
The restrictions imposed upon his dealings by the ancient law are as follows:
"It was upon conference and mature deliberation resolved by all the justices,
that no merchant or any other may buy within the realme any victuall or other
merchandize in grosse, and sell the same in grosse againe, for then he is an
ingrosser, and punishable; for by this means the prices of victuals and other
merchandize shall be inhaunced, to the grievance of the subject; for the more
hands they passe through, the dearer they grow, for every one thirsteth after
gaine, vitiosum fiziunt lucrum.And if these things were lawfull, a riche man
might ingrosse into his hands all a commodity, and sell the same at what price
he will." (Coke, Institutes III, LXXXIX.)
By Statute 5, 6, Edward VI, 1, 4, anyone convicted of engrossing was punished
by fine and imprisonment. "The Party guilty of any of the Offences aforesaid,
shall Forfeit for the first Offence the value of the Goods so bought or had,
and suffer two Months Imprisonment without Bail; for the second, the double
value, and suffer six Months Imprisonment without Bail; and for the third,
shall Forfeit all his Goods, be set upon the Pillory, and be Imprisoned at the
King's pleasure."
The English laws against hoarding the necessaries of life were enforced without
fear or favor, and were not, as is the case in this country, manipulated and
perverted by corrupt politicians for their own purposes. --- ED.
have treacherously been given to another, for the prosecution of this offence
was assigned by the Divine Brothers to the Prefect of the City.
9. The Same, In the Same Book.
There are certain offences which are punished in accordance with the customs of
the provinces in which they are committed; as, for instance, in the Province of
Arabia a certain crime, designated "the placing of stones," is known, the
nature of which is as follows: The majority of the people are accustomed to set
stones in the field of an enemy, which indicate that if anyone cultivates the
field, he will suffer death through the snares of those who deposited the
stones there. This proceeding causes such fear that no one dares approach the
field in apprehension of the cruelty of those who placed the stones on the
land. Governors are accustomed to inflict the extreme penalty for the
commission of this offence, because it itself threatens death.
10. The Same, In the Same Book.
In Egypt, anyone who breaks or injures dykes (these are levees which retain the
water of the Nile) are also punished in an arbitrary manner, according to their
civil condition, and the measure of the offence. Some of them are sentenced to
the public works, or to the mines. Anyone, also, who cuts down a sycamore tree,
can also be sentenced to the mines, according to his rank, for this offence is
also punished arbitrarily, and by a severe penalty, because these trees
strengthen the dykes of the Nile by which the inundations of that river are
distributed and restrained, and the diminution of its volume arrested. The
dykes, as well as the channels cut through them, afford ground for the
punishment of those who interfere with their operation.
11. Paulus, Sentences, Book I.
An action in proportion to the gravity of the offence will be granted against
mountebanks who carry around and exhibit serpents, when any damage results
through fear of these reptiles.
TITLE XII. CONCERNING THE VIOLATION OF SEPULCHRES.
1. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Pr&tor, Book II.
The action for violating a sepulchre brands a person with infamy.
2. The Same, On the Edict of the Praetor, Book XVIII.
Where anyone demolishes a sepulchre, the Aquilian Law does not apply, but
proceedings can be instituted under the interdict Quod vi out clam.This opinion
was also stated by Celsus with reference to a statue torn from a monument. He
also asks if it was not fastened with lead, or attached to the tomb, in any
way, whether it should be considered a part of the monument, or a part of our
property. Celsus says that it is a part of the monument, as a receptacle of
bones, and therefore the interdict Quod vi aut clam,will be applicable.
3. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Prsetor, Book V.
The Prsetor says: "If a sepulchre is said to have been violated by anyone
maliciously, I will grant an action in factumagainst him, in order that he may
be condemned for an amount which may appear to be just, in favor of the party
interested. If there is no one who is interested, or if there is and he
declines to bring suit, and anyone else is willing to do so, I will grant him
an action for a hundred aurei.If several persons should desire to institute
proceedings, I will grant power to do so to him whose cause appears to be the
most just. Where anyone, with malicious intent, inhabits a sepulchre, or
constructs any other edifice than that which is intended for a tomb, I will
grant an action for two hundred aureito anyone who is willing to bring it in
his own name."
(1) The first words of this Edict show that he who violates a sepulchre with
malicious intent is punished by it. Therefore, if there is no malicious intent,
the penalty will not apply. Hence, those who are not capable of criminality,
as, for instance, children under the age of puberty, as well as persons who did
not approach the sepulchre with the intention of violating it, are excused.
(2) Every place of sepulture is understood to be included in the term
sepulchre.
(3) If anyone should place a body in an hereditary tomb, even though it be the
heir, he will still be liable to the action for violation of a sepulchre, if he
did so against the wish of the testator; for a testator is permitted to provide
that no one shall be buried in his tomb, as is stated in the Rescript of the
Emperor Antoninus, for his wish must be complied with. Therefore, if he says
that only one of the heirs can inter persons therein, this must be observed, so
that the designated heir alone may do so.
(4) It is provided by an Edict of the Divine Severus that bodies may be
transferred, which have not been buried in one place for all time; and by this
Edict it is directed that the transportation of bodies shall not be delayed, or
meddled with, or they shall not be prevented from being conveyed through
territory belonging to cities.
The Divine Marcus, however, stated in a Rescript that those who transported
bodies on the highways through villages or towns were not liable to any
penalty, although this should not be done without the permission of those who
have the right to grant it.
(5) The Divine Hadrian, by a Rescript, fixed a penalty of forty aureiagainst
those who buried dead bodies in cities, and he ordered the penalty to be paid
to the Treasury. He also directed the same penalty to be inflicted against
magistrates who suffered this to be done; and ordered the place to be sold by
auction, and the body to be removed. But what if the municipal law permits
burial in a city? Let us see whether this right has been annulled by the
Imperial Rescripts, for the reason that Rescripts are of general application.
The Imperial Rescripts must be enforced and are valid everywhere.
(6) Where anyone lives in a sepulchre or has a building on the ground, whoever
desires to do so can bring the action.
(7) Governors are accustomed to proceed more severely against those who despoil
dead bodies, especially if they go armed; for if they commit the offence armed
like robbers, they are punished capitally, as the Divine Severus provided in a
Rescript; but if they commit it unarmed, any penalty can be inflicted up to
sentence to the mines.
(8) Those who have jurisdiction of the action for violating a sepulchre must
estimate the amount of the interest in proportion to the injury which has been
inflicted, as well as in proportion to the advantage obtained by the person
guilty of the violation; or to the damage which resulted; or to the audacity of
him who committed the offence. Still, judgment should be rendered for a smaller
sum where the parties interested are the accusers than where a stranger brought
the suit.
(9) If the right of sepulture belongs to several persons, shall we grant an
action to all of them, or to the one who manifested the most diligence? Labeo
very properly says that the action ought to be granted to all, because it is
brought for the individual interest of each one.
(10) If the party in interest does not wish to bring suit for violation of the
sepulchre, but, having changed his mind before issue was joined, says that he
desires to proceed, he shall be heard.
(11) If a slave lives in a sepulchre, or builds a house there, a noxal action
will not lie, and the Praetor promises this action against him. If, however, he
does not live there, but uses the place as a resort, a noxal action will be
granted, provided he appears to retain possession of the ground.
(12) This action is a popular one.
4. Paulus, On the Edict of the Prsetor, Book XXVII.
The sepulchres of enemies are not religious places in our eyes, and therefore
we can make use of any stones which have been removed from them for any purpose
whatsoever, without becoming liable to the action for violating a sepulchre.
5. Pomponius, On Plautius, Book IX.
It is our practice to hold that the owners of land, in which they have set
apart places of sepulture, have the right of access to the sepulchres, even
after they have sold the land. For it is provided by the laws relating to the
sale of real property that a right of way is reserved to sepulchres situated
thereon, as well as the right to approach and surround them for the purpose of
conducting funer"al ceremonies.
6. Julianus, Digest, Book X.
The action for violating a sepulchre is, first of all, granted to him to whom
the property belongs, and if he does not proceed, and someone else does, even
though the owner may be absent on business for the
State, the action should not be granted a second time against one who has paid
the damages assessed. The condition of the person who was absent on business
for the State cannot be held to have become worse, as this action does not so
much concern his private affairs as it does the public vengeance.
7. Marcianus, Institutes, Book III.
It is forbidden to make the condition of a sepulchre worse, but it is lawful to
repair a monument which has become decayed, and ruined, but without touching
the bodies contained therein.
8. Macer, Public Prosecutions, Book I.
The crime of violating a sepulchre may be considered as coming within the terms
of the Julian Law relating to public violence, and that part in which it is
provided that he shall be punished who prevents anyone from celebrating funeral
ceremonies, or burying a corpse; because he who violates a sepulchre commits an
act preventing interment.
9. The Same, Public Prosecutions, Book II.
A pecuniary action is also granted for violating a sepulchre.
10. Papinianus, Questions, Book Vill.
The question arose whether the right of action for violating a sepulchre
belongs to the necessary heir, when he has not meddled with the property of the
estate. I held that he can very properly bring this action, which is introduced
in accordance with what is good and just. And, if he should bring it, he need
have no apprehension of the creditors of the estate; for although this action
is derived from it, still nothing is received through the will of the deceased,
nor is anything obtained from the pursuit of the property, but only in
consequence of the punishment inflicted by the law.
11. Paulus, Sentences, Book V.
Persons guilty of having violated sepulchres, and who have removed bodies or
the bones, are punished with the extreme penalty if they are of low rank; those
of higher rank are deported to some island; others still are either relegated,
or condemned to the mines.

TITLE XIII. CONCERNING EXTORTION.

1. Ulpianus, Opinions, Book V.
If extortion is committed under a pretended order of the Governor, the
Governor of the province shall order the property surrendered through
terror, to be restored, and shall punish the crime.

2. Macer, Public Prosecutions, Book I.
The prosecution of extortion is not public, but if anyone has received
money because he threatened another with a criminal accusation, the
prosecution may become public under the Decrees of the Senate, by
which all those are ordered to be liable to the penalty of the
Cornelian Law who have joined in the denunciation of innocent persons,
and have received money in consideration of accusing, or not accusing
others, or of giving, or not giving testimony against them.


TITLE XIV. CONCERNING THOSE WHO STEAL CATTLE.


1. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book Vill.
The Divine Hadrian, at the Council of Bsetica, stated in a Rescript relating to
cattle-thieves, "When those who drive away cattle are punished most severely,
they are ordinarily condemned to the sword." They are not, however, punished
with the greatest severity everywhere, but only in those places where this
species of offence is most frequently committed; otherwise, they are sentenced
to hard labor in the public works, and sometimes only temporarily.
(1) Those are properly considered cattle-thieves who remove cattle from
pastures, or from droves, and prey upon them, as it were; and they exercise
this occupation of stealing cattle as a regular trade when they take horses or
cattle from the droves of which they form a part. If, however, anyone should
drive away an ox that is lost, or horses which have been left alone, he does
not belong to this category, but is merely an ordinary thief.
(2) He, however, who drives away a sow, a she-goat, or a sheep should not be
punished as severely as one who steals larger animals.
(3) Although Hadrian established the penalty of the mines, or that of labor on
the public works, or that of the sword for this offence; still, those who do
not belong to the lowest rank of society should not be subjected to this
penalty, for they either should be relegated or expelled from their order.
Those, however, who-drive away cattle, while armed, are not unjustly thrown to
wild beasts.
(4) Anyone who drives away cattle whose ownership is in dispute should be
subjected to a civil investigation, as Saturninus says; but this rule ought
only to be adopted where no pretext for stealing the cattle is sought, but the
accused person, induced by good reasons, actually believed that the cattle
belonged to him.
2. Macer, Public Prosecutions, Book I.
The crime of driving away cattle is not subject to public prosecution, because
it is rather to be classed as a theft; but since most offenders of this
description go armed, if they are arrested, they are usually more severely
punished on this account.
3. Callistratus, On Legal Investigations, Book VI.Sheep, in proportion to the
number driven away, either render a man a common thief, or an appropriator of
cattle. Certain authori-
ties have held that ten sheep constitute a flock, just as four or five hogs,
when they are driven away from a drove; but a cattle-thief commits this crime
if he steals but one horse or ox.
(1) He also should be more severely punished who drives away a tame flock from
a stable, and not from a forest, or one forming part of a larger flock.
(2) Those who have often perpetrated this offence, although they may have taken
only one or two animals at a time, are nevertheless, classed as cattle thieves.
(3) Those who harbor offenders of this kind should, according to an Epistle of
the Divine Trajan, be punished by being banished from Italy for ten years.

TITLE XV. CONCERNING PREVARICATION.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Prietor, Book VI.
A prevaricator is a person who takes both sides, and assists the adverse party
by the betrayal of his own case. This term, Labeo says, is derived from a
varying contest, for he acts in this manner who, apparently being on one side,
actually favors the other.
(1) A prevaricator, properly so called, is one who appears as accuser in a
criminal prosecution. An advocate, however, is not correctly said to be a
prevaricator. What then should be done with him if he should be guilty of this
offence, in either a private or a public proceeding, that is to say, if he has
betrayed his own side ? It is usual for him to be punished arbitrarily.
2. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book IX.It should be remembered that,
at present, those who are guilty of this offence are punished with an arbitrary
penalty.
3. Macer, Public Prosecutions, Book I.
The judgment for prevarication is either public or introduced by custom.
(1) If the defendant opposes the prosecutor in a criminal case, alleging that
he already has been accused of the same crime by another and acquitted, it is
provided by the Julian Law relating to public prosecutions that he cannot be
prosecuted until the crime charged by the first accuser and the judgment
rendered with reference to it have been investigated. Therefore, the decision
of cases of this kind is understood to belong to the category of public
prosecutions.
(2) Where the crime of prevarication is said to have been committed by an
advocate, a public prosecution cannot be instituted; and it makes no difference
whether he is said to have committed it in a public or a private proceeding.
(3) Therefore if anyone is accused of having abandoned a public prosecution,
the case will not be public, because no provision was made for this by any law;
and a public accusation is not authorized by that
decree of the Senate which prescribes the penalty of five pounds of gold
against anyone who abandons a case.
4. The Same, Public Prosecutions, Book II.
If a person against whom an action for slander cannot be brought is convicted
of being a prevaricator in a criminal case, he will become infamous.
5. Venuleius Saturninus, Public Prosecutions, Book II.An accuser convicted of
prevarication cannot afterwards bring an accusation under the law.
6. Paulus, On Public Prosecutions.
It was stated in a Rescript by our Emperor and his Father that, in the case of
crimes which are opposed as being extraordinary, prevaricators shall be
punished with the same penalty to which they would have been liable, if they
themselves had violated the law by which the defendant was acquitted through
their treacherous instrumentality.
7. Ulpianus, On Taxes, Book IV.
In all cases except those in which the shedding of blood is involved, anyone
who corrupts the informer is considered as convicted, according to the Decree
of the Senate.

TITLE XVI. CONCERNING THOSE WHO HARBOR CRIMINALS.

1. Marcianus, Public Prosecutions, Book II.
The harborers of criminals constitute one of the worst classes of offenders,
for without them no criminal could long remain concealed. The law directs that
they shall be punished as robbers. They should be placed in the same class,
because when they can seize robbers they permit them to go, after having
received money or- a part of the stolen goods.
2. Paulus, On the Punishment of Civilians.
Persons by whom a thief, who is either their connection by affinity or their
blood relative, is concealed, should neither be discharged, nor severely
punished, for their crime is not as serious as that of those who conceal
robbers who are in no way connected with them.

TITLE XVII. CONCERNING THIEVES WHO STEAL IN BATHS.

1. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book Vill.
Nocturnal thieves should be arbitrarily tried and punished when proper cause is
shown, provided we take care that no greater penalty is inflicted than that of
labor on the public works. The same rule ap-
plies to thieves who steal in baths. If, however, the thieves defend themselves
with weapons, or if they have broken in, or have done anything of this kind,
but have not struck anyone, they shall be sentenced to the mines, and those of
superior social position shall be exiled.
2. Marcianus, Public Prosecutions, Book II.
If they commit theft in the daytime, they should be tried in the ordinary way.
3. Paulus, On the Punishment of Soldiers.
A soldier who has been caught stealing a bath should be dishonorably discharged
from the service.

TITLE XVIII.
CONCERNING THOSE WHO BREAK OUT OF PRISON, AND PLUNDERERS.

1. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book Vill.
The Divine Brothers stated in a Rescript addressed to ^milius Tiro, that
persons who break out of prison should suffer death. Satur-ninus also adopts
the opinion that those who have escaped from prison whether by breaking down
the doors, or by conspiring with others confined with them, should be capitally
punished, but if they escaped through the negligence of the guards, they should
undergo a lighter penalty.
(1) Robbers, who are more atrocious thieves (for this is the meaning of the
word) should be sentenced to labor on the public works either for life, or for
a certain term of years; those, however, who are of superior rank should be
temporarily dismissed from their order, or compelled to depart beyond the
boundaries of their country; but no special penalty has been imposed upon them
by the Imperial Rescripts. Therefore, where proper cause is shown, the
magistrate having jurisdiction can pronounce judgment according to his
discretion.
(2) In like manner, thieves who carry bags, directarii,and those who break into
buildings, shall be punished in the same way. The Emperor Marcus ordered that a
Roman knight who had stolen money, after having broken through a wall, should
be banished from the Province of Africa from whence he came, as well as from
the City, and from Italy, for the term of five years. It is, however,
necessary, after proper cause has been shown, to render a decision with
reference to both those who break into houses, and the other offenders above
mentioned, according to the circumstances attending the crime; provided that no
one shall be sentenced to a more severe penalty than that of labor on the
public works, if he is a plebeian, and if he is of higher rank, shall suffer no
more severe punishment than that of exile.
2. Paulus, On the Duties of the Prefect of the Night Watch.Different penalties
are inflicted upon persons who break into houses, for those who break in at
night are the more 'atrocious, and
hence they are usually scourged and sentenced to the mines. Those, however, who
break in by day, are first whipped, and then sentenced to hard labor for life
or for a specified time.

TITLE XIX. CONCERNING THE SPOLIATION OF ESTATES.

1. Marcianus, Institutes, Book III.
When anyone plunders the estate of another, it is customary for him to be
punished arbitrarily, by means of the accusation of despoiling an estate, as is
provided by a Rescript of the Divine Marcus.
2. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book IX.
In prosecuting the crime of plundering an estate, the Governor of the province
should take judicial cognizance of the same; for when the action for theft
cannot be brought, recourse to the Governor alone remains.
(1) It is evident that the offence of plundering an estate can only be
prosecuted under circumstances where the action for theft is not available,
that is to say, before the estate has been entered upon, or after it has been
entered upon, but before the property has been taken possession of by the heir;
for it is clear that, in this instance, the action of theft will not lie,
although there is no doubt that one for the production of property can be
brought, if anyone desires this to be done in order to enable him to claim it.
3. Marcianus, Public Prosecutions, Book II.
The Divine Severus and Antoninus stated in a Rescript that anyone who desired
to prosecute extraordinarily the crime of plundering an estate could do so
either before the Prefect of the City or the Governor ; or he could demand the
estate from the possessors by the ordinary course of procedure.
4. Paulus, Opinions, Book III.
The property of an estate belongs in common to all the heirs, and therefore he
who brings an accusation for the crime of plundering it, and gains his case, is
also considered to have benefited his co-heir.
5. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book II.
A wife cannot be accused of the crime of plundering an estate, because the
action of theft cannot be brought against her.
6. Paulus, On Neratius, Book I.
If, not knowing that certain property belongs to an estate, you take it, Paulus
says that you commit a theft. Theft of property belonging to an estate is not
committed any more than that of property which has no owner, and the opinion of
the person who steals it does not change the character of the action in any
respect.

TITLE XX. CONCERNING STELLIONATUS.

1. Papinianus, Opinions, Book I.
The action of Stellionatusis not included in public prosecutions or in private
actions.
2. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book Vill.
Ajudgment for this offence does not brand anyone with infamy, but it is
followed by extraordinary punishment.
3. The Same, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book HI.
The accusation of Stellionatuscomes within the jurisdiction of the Governor.
(1) It must be remembered that those who have committed any fraudulent act can
be prosecuted for this crime, that is to say, if there is no other of which
they can be accused, for what in private law gives rise to an action for fraud
is the basis for a criminal prosecution in an accusation of Stellionatus.Hence,
whenever where the offence lacks a name, we designate it
Stellionatus.Especially, however, does this apply to anyone who exchanges or
gives property in payment through deceit, where the property has been
encumbered to another, and he conceals the fact; for all instances of this kind
include stellion-atus.And, where anyone has substituted some article for
another; or has put aside goods which he was obliged to deliver, or has spoiled
them, he is also liable for this offence. Likewise, if anyone has been guilty
of imposture, or has been in collusion to bring about the death of another, he
can be prosecuted for Stellionatus.And, generally speaking, I should say that
where the name of any crime is wanting, an accusation for this offence can be
brought, but it is not necessary to enumerate the different instances.
(2) No punishment, however, is legally prescribed for Stellionatus,since, under
the law, it is not a crime. It is, however, customary for it to be punished
arbitrarily, provided that, in the case of plebeians, the penalty inflicted is
not more severe than that of condemnation to the mines. But, in the case of
those who occupy a higher position, the sentence of temporary exile, or
expulsion from their order should be imposed.
(3) Anyone who has fraudulently concealed merchandise can be specially
prosecuted for this crime.
4. Modestinus, On Punishments, Book III.
When anyone swears in a written instrument that property pledged belongs to
him, thereby committing perjury, it becomes Stellionatus,and therefore the
culprit should be sent into temporary exile.1
1 Stellionatuswas aptly defined by an eminent French commentator on the Digest
of Justinian, to be "Omnis atrox dolus qui proprio nomine caret."As ex-
TITLE XXI. CONCERNING THE REMOVAL OF BOUNDARIES.
1. Modestinus, Rules, Book Vill.
The penalty for the removal of boundaries is not a pecuniary fine, but should
be regulated according to the social position of the guilty parties.
2. Callistratus, On Judicial Inquiries, Book III.
The Divine Hadrian stated the following in a Rescript. There can be no doubt
that those who remove monuments placed to establish boundaries are guilty of a
very wicked act. In fixing the penalty, however, its degree should be
determined by the rank and intention of the individual who perpetrated the
crime, for if persons of eminent rank are convicted, there is no doubt that
they committed the act for the purpose of obtaining the land of others, and
they can be relegated for a certain time, dependent upon their age; that is to
say, if the accused is very young, he should be exiled for a longer time; if he
is old, for a shorter time.
Where others have transacted their business, and have furnished their services,
they shall be chastised and sentenced to hard labor on the public works for two
years. If, however, they removed the monuments through ignorance, or
accidentally, it will be sufficient to have them whipped.
isting under the Scottish Law, and made a crime by an Act having reference to a
fraudulent agreement to convey or rent the same land to different persons, it
is thus described:
"The heart of man is deceitful above all things, and such as have been
conversant in business and Courts of Justice have found that cheats do amongst
men multiply, and vary themselves into so many formes, that Legislators were
forced to invent this general name of Stellionat; under which they might range
all cheats."
"The disponing duties of rents of Lands to several persons, shall be accompted
Stellionatus;and therefore whatever was punished as Stellionat by the Civil Law
may be punished as such by ours; not only a pari,or by extension, but by
approbation; the Roman Law having by the allowance of that Act become ours; and
therefore the making of double assignations or dispositions of lands, or for
anything else besides Rents mentioned expressly in that Act, is punished as
Stellionat in our practique."
"Whosoever makes double Disposition of Lands, he shall be called at the Kings
instance, and punisht at the Kings will."
"The punishment then of this crime could not be certain and determinat, seing
the crime is various in its own nature, but it is arbitrary and punishable at
the discretion of the Judge, according to the circumstances, and measures of
the fraud committed. And it is called Stellionat, from a Serpent called
Stellio,which is beautified by Starry spots, stellatis guttis distinetum,and is
the most subtile of all Serpents, Plin. Lib. 30, Nat. Histor., Cap. 10."
(Mackenzie, The Laws and Customes of Scotland in Matters Criminal, I, XXVIII.)
The stellioof Pliny, above mentioned, was a lizard, and not a serpent, perhaps
the chameleon.
Stellionatus,as a distinct offence, is not recognized by the Common or
Statutory Law of England.ED.
3. The Same, On Judicial Inquiries, Book V.
A pecuniary penalty was established by the agrarian law which Gaius Caesar
enacted against those who fraudulently removed monuments beyond their proper
place, and the boundaries of their land; for it directed that they should pay
to the Public Treasury fifty aureifor every boundary mark which they took out
or removed, and that an action should be granted to anyone who desired to bring
it.
(1) By another agrarian law, introduced by the Divine Nerva, it is provided
that if a male or female slave, without the knowledge of his or her master,
commits this offence with malicious intent, he or she shall be punished with
death, unless his or her master or mistress prefers to pay the fine.
(2) Those, also, who change the appearance of the place in order to render the
location of the boundaries obscure, as by making a shrub out of a tree; or
plowed land out of a forest; or who do anything else of this kind, shall be
punished in accordance with their character and their rank, and the violence
with which their acts were committed.[[FOOTNOTE 1]]


TITLE XXII.
CONCEENING ASSOCIATIONS AND CORPORATIONS.

1. Marcianus, Institutes, Book HI.
By the Decrees of the Emperors, the Governors of provinces are directed to
forbid the organization of corporate associations, and not even to permit
soldiers to form them in camps. The more indigent soldiers, however, are
allowed to put their pay every month into a

[[FOOTNOTE 1]]
1 The Bible invoked a curse upon him who removed his neighbor's landmark.
(Deuteronomy XXVII, 17.)
Among many ancient nations this was a capital crime; with some it entailed
other penalties of greater or less severity.
These monuments were invested with peculiar sanctity by the Babylonians. An
account or description of the tract whose limits they defined was frequently
inscribed upon them, imperishable historical memorials of incalculable value to
subsequent generations containing information nowhere else to be found. Every
available method, both religious and secular, of exciting fear was employed to
. prevent interference with boundary-stones. The anathemas of king and priest
were denounced against whoever meddled with them. The offender was placed in
the same category as an obstructor of the highway, and rendered himself liable
to be hanged upon a gallows erected over his own residence. (Johns, Babylonian
and Assyrian Laws, Contracts and Letters, Chap. XVIII, Pages 191, 192.)
The Law of Wales also inflicted the penalty of death.
"There are three other stones, which if any man remove, he shall be indicted as
a thief; the boundary stone, the white stone of convention, and the guide
stone; and he that destroys them shall forfeit his life." (The Ancient Laws of
Cambria: Triads of Dyvnwal Moelmud 100.) The Visigoths exacted a fine of twenty
solidifrom a freeman who designedly removed a landmark; a slave received fifty
lashes. In every instance, restoration of the monument to its former position
was compulsory. "Qui studio pervadendi limites complanaverit, aut terminos
fixos fuerit ausus evellere; si ingenuus est, per singula signa vel notas XX,
solidos, mi fraudem fecit, cogatur inferre: et si servus est, per singula signa
L. flagella suscipiat, et limitem et terminum restituat." (Forum Judicum,X,
III, II.)ED.
---------------------------------------------

common fund, provided they assemble only once during that time, for fear that
under a pretext of this kind they may organize an unlawful society, which the
Divine Severus stated in a Rescript should not be tolerated, not only at Rome,
but also in Italy and in the provinces.
(1) To assemble for religious purposes is, however, not forbidden if, by doing
so, no act is committed against the Decree of the Senate by which unlawful
societies are prohibited.
(2) It is not legal to join more than one association authorized by law, as has
been decided by the Divine Brothers. If anyone should become a member of two
associations, it is provided by a rescript that he must select the one to which
he prefers to belong, and he shall receive from the body from which he
withdraws whatever he may be entitled to out of the property held in common.

2. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Proconsul, Book VII.
Anyone who becomes a member of an unlawful association is liable to the same
penalty to which those are subject who have been convicted of having seized
public places or temples by means of armed men.

3. Marcianus, Public Prosecutions, Book II.
If associations are illegal, they will be dissolved by the terms of Imperial
Mandates and Constitutions, and Decrees of the Senate. When they are dissolved,
the members are permitted to divide among themselves the money or property
owned in common, if there is any of this kind.
(1) In a word, unless an association or any body of this description assembles
with the authority of the Decree of the Senate, or of the Emperor, this
assembly is contrary to the provisions of the Decree of the Senate and the
Imperial Mandates and Constitutions.
(2) Itis also lawful for slaves to be admitted into associations of indigent
persons, with the consent of their masters; and those who have charge of such
societies are hereby notified that they cannot receive a slave into an
association of indigent persons without the knowledge or consent of his master,
and if they do, that they will be liable to a penalty of a hundred aureifor
every slave admitted.
4. Gaius, On the Law of the Twelve Tables, Book IV.
Members are those who belong to the same association which the Greeks call
Iraipia.They are legally authorized to make whatever contracts they may desire
with one another, provided they do nothing in violation of the public law.
The enactment appears to have been taken from that of Solon, which is as
follows: "If the people, or brothers, or those who are associated together for
the purpose of sacrifice, or sailors, or those who are buried in the same tomb,
or members of the same society who generally live together, should have
entered, or do enter into any contract with one another, whatever they agree
upon shall stand, if the public laws do not forbid it."



TITLE XXIII. CONCERNING POPULAR ACTIONS.

1. Paulus, On the Edict, Book Vill.
We call that a popular action which protects the rights of the party who brings
it, as well as those of the people.
2. The Same, On the Edict, Book I.
Where several persons bring a popular action at the same time, the Praetor
shall select the most suitable one of them.
3. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book I.
If suit is brought several times for the same cause, when the same act is
involved, the ordinary exception of res judicatacan be pleaded.
(1) In popular actions, the party in interest is given the preference.
4. Paulus, On the Edict, Book III.
Apopular action is granted to a person whose rights are unimpaired, that is to
say, to one who can bring suit under the Edict.
5. The Same, On the Edict, Book Vill.
Where anyone is sued in a popular action, he can appoint an attorney to defend
him, but he who brings the suit cannot appoint one.
6. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXV.
Popular actions are not granted to women and minors, unless they are interested
in the matter.
7. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XLI.
Popular actions do not pass to him to whom an estate has been restored under
the Trebellian Decree of the Senate.
(1) The person entitled to bring these actions is not considered to be
pecuniarily benefited on this account.
8. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book I.
All popular actions are not granted against heirs, nor is the right to bring
them extended beyond the term of a year.
