# -*- mode: org -*-

* BOOK XXXVII.

+ 37.I. CONCERNING THE PRAETORIAN POSSESSION OF PROPERTY. .
+ 37.II. PAGE CONCERNING PRAETORIAN POSSESSION WHERE THERE is A WILL
+ 37.III. CONCERNING THE PRAETORIAN POSSESSION OF PROPERTY GRANTED TO AN INSANE PERSON, AN INFANT, OR ONE WHO is DUMB, DEAF, OR BLIND
+ 37.IV. CONCERNING THE PRAETORIAN POSSESSION OF PROPERTY CONTRARY TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE WILL.
+ 37.V. CONCERNING THE PAYMENT OF LEGACIES WHERE PRAETORIAN POSSESSION OF AN ESTATE IS OBTAINED CONTRARY TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE WILL
+ 37.VI. CONCERNING THE COLLATION OF PROPERTY
+ 37.VII. CONCERNING COLLATION OF THE DOWRY
+ 37.VIII. CONCERNING THE CONTRIBUTION TO BE MADE BETWEEN AN EMANCIPATED SON AND HIS CHILDREN
+ 37.IX. CONCERNING THE PLACING OF AN UNBORN CHILD IN POSSESSION OF AN ESTATE, AND HIS CURATOR
+ 37.X. CONCERNING THE CARBONIAN EDICT.
+ 37.XI. CONCERNING PRAETORIAN POSSESSION OF AN ESTATE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THE WILL
+ 37.XII. CONCERNING PRAETORIAN POSSESSION WHERE A SON HAS BEEN MANUMITTED BY His FATHER
+ 37.XIII. CONCERNING PRAETORIAN POSSESSION OF AN ESTATE IN THE CASE OF THE WILL OF A SOLDIER
+ 37.XIV. CONCERNING THE EIGHT OF PATRONAGE
+ 37.XV. CONCERNING THE RESPECT WHICH SHOULD BE SHOWN TO PARENTS AND
PATRONS


THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS. SIXTH PART. BOOK XXXVII.


* 37.I. CONCERNING THE PRAETORIAN POSSESSION OF PROPERTY.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIX.
Praetorian possession transfers both the benefits and inconveniences attached
to an estate, as well as the ownership of the property belonging to the same;
for all these things are associated with it.
2. The Same, On the Edict, Book XIV.
Praetorian possessors, in every respect, take the place of heirs.
3. The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXIX.
The term &quot;property&quot; in this instance (as we generally accept the
term), must be understood to mean everything belonging to an estate to which
succession is granted under the rights of the deceased, all benefits and
disadvantages connected with it being included. For the estate is either
solvent or insolvent, and is liable to loss or gain, or the assets consist of
things which are corporeal, or of rights of action ; and, under these
circumstances, they are very properly designated property.
(1) The possession of an estate, or praetorian possession (as Labeo says),
should not be understood to be the actual possession of the property, for it is
rather legal than real. Hence, where nothing corporeal belongs to the estate,
Labeo holds that, nevertheless, praetorian possession may be acquired.
(2) Therefore, we define praetorian possession to be the right of recovering or
retaining an estate, or the effects which belonged to someone at the time of
his death.
(3) Praetorian possession of property is not acquired by anyone against his
will.
(4) Praetorian possession can be acquired by municipalities, associations,
decurite,and corporate bodies. Hence an agent of any of the said corporations
can obtain it, or anyone else can do so in their name; and even if no one
should demand or receive such possession in the name of a municipality, it
still can acquire it under the Edict of the Praetor.
(5) Praetorian possession of property can be granted to the head of a
household, as well as to a son under paternal control, provided the latter has
the right of disposing of his peculium castrenseor quasi castrense,by will.
(6) There is no doubt that praetorian possession of the estate of a person who
has died in the hands of the enemy can be acquired, even though he may have
died in a condition of slavery.
(7) Any person can obtain praetorian possession either himself or through the
agency of another. If, however, someone should demand possession for me, when I
have not directed this to be done, his act will not be legal until I have
ratified it. Moreover, there is no doubt that if I should die before ratifying
his act, I will not be entitled to the possession of the property, because I
have not consented to what he has done, and my heir cannot do so, as the right
to claim praetorian possession does not pass to him.
(8) Where praetorian possession is granted after proper cause has been shown,
it shall not be granted anywhere else than in court, because the Praetor cannot
render such a decree without ceremony; nor, after an investigation, can
praetorian possession be granted anywhere else than in his tribunal.
(9) It should be remembered that the right of accrual applies to the Praetorian
possession of property. Hence, if there are several persons entitled to such
possession, and one of them obtains it, the others are not included:
4. Gaius, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book Vill.
(For instance, where they have relinquished their right, or have been excluded
from praetorian possession by lapse of time, or have died before demanding
possession) :
5. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIX.
For the shares to which the others would have been entitled, if they had
claimed possession of the estate, will accrue to the one who did obtain
possession.
6. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XLI.
But where the Praetor promises possession of a certain part of an estate to a
patron, contrary to the provisions of the will, and promises possession of the
remainder to the appointed heir, in accordance with the terms of the will, it
is held that the right of accrual does not apply. Therefore, he promises
possession of his share expressly to the patron, when the appointed heir does
not claim his share under the will; as
those entitled to the right of accrual must, at least once, demand possession
of the estate.
(1) There are various advantages attaching to praetorian possession, for some
kinds of possession are obtained contrary to the provisions of the will of the
testator, and others in accordance with them; and sometimes the parties have a
lawful right to it on the ground of intestacy, or they are not entitled to it
because of having changed their civil status. For although, under the Civil
Law, children are excluded from being direct heirs on account of their change
of condition, still, the Praetor can, for equitable reasons, rescind this
forfeiture of citizenship. He therefore grants possession of the property for
the purpose of observing certain laws.
(2) Testamentary notes are not considered by the Edict as wills; for Pedius in
the Twenty-fifth Book on the Edict says that notes are not letters.
7. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book I.
A slave can legally be granted possession of an estate if the Praetor is
certain of his civil condition. Possession can also be granted to a person who
is absent and does not demand it, if the Praetor is not aware that this is the
case. A woman, also, can apply for praetorian possession in behalf of another.
(1) A minor under the age of puberty cannot be granted possession of an estate
by the Praetor, nor can he join issue in the case, without the authority of his
guardian, because a guardian can demand possession for his ward, and a father
can do so for his son.
(2) It has been decided that the time when possession must be demanded for a
minor begins when the guardian or father became aware that the minor was
entitled to it.
8. Paulus, On Plautius, Book Vill.
Moreover, a guardian cannot reject the praetorian possession of an estate to
which his ward is entitled, because a guardian is permitted to claim it, but
not to reject it.
9. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book HI.
Where there are several persons of different degrees of relationship entitled
to praetorian possession, as long as it is uncertain whether one of them has
the right to demand possession, or not, it has been settled that the time does
not run against one of the last degree.
10. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book II.
Ignorance of the law is of no advantage in preventing the claim from being
barred by lapse of time, in the case of praetorian possession of property.
Hence, the time begins to run, so far as the appointed heir is concerned, even
before the will has been opened; for it is enough for him to know that the
testator is dead, and that he is his next of kin, and had access to persons of
whom he could ask advice. For, in this instance, knowledge is not understood to
be such as is possessed by per-
sons learned in the law, but such as anyone whosoever may possess, or can
acquire by applying to others who are more learned than himself.
11. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XIV.
Where a guardian claims praetorian possession in behalf of his ward, and it is
found to be of greater disadvantage than benefit to him, the guardian will be
liable to an action on guardianship.
12. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XLVI1I.
There is no reason to doubt that persons can, very frequently, obtain
praetorian possession against the Treasury, and against a municipality; as, for
example, where an unborn child, a lunatic, or one who is a captive in the hands
of the enemy, claims praetorian possession of property. Whenever a law, a
Decree of the Senate, or an Imperial Constitution forbids an estate to be
taken, praetorian possession of it will not apply.
13. Africanus, Questions, Book XV.
The possession of property by the Edict of the Praetor is refused to those who
have been condemned for a capital crime, unless complete restitution has been
granted them. A person is understood to have been condemned for a capital crime
upon whom the penalty of death, or the interdiction of water and fire has been
imposed. Anyone, however, who has been exiled, can be admitted to the
praetorian possession of property.
14. Papinianus, Questions, Book XIII.
Where a near relative of the deceased alleges that his will was forged, and
proves it after a long period of time, although the time for demanding
possession is held to have elapsed, and the plaintiff, being certain of proving
his allegations, may have claimed it, still, for the reason that he asserted
his claim in order to preserve his rights, it is not unreasonable that he
should be considered to have accepted the succession.
15. Paulus, Opinions, Book XL
Paulus gave it as his opinion that the application of a mother, alone, could
not acquire praetorian possession of an estate for her daughter, who was under
the age of puberty, unless he who granted it evidently intended to give it to
the minor child.
16. The Same, Sentences, Book HI.
When the person for whom praetorian possession is demanded subsequently becomes
insane, the better opinion is that he will be held to have ratified the act,
for a ratification only means the confirmation of a former demand.


* 37.II. CONCERNING PRAETORIAN POSSESSION WHERE THERE Is A WILL.

1. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book III.
Praetorian possession of property can, under no circumstances, be granted to an
heir whose name has been erased from the will so that it can hardly be read,
even though this has been done unintentionally; because the presumption is that
it was not properly inserted, although such possession may be granted if the
name has been defaced after the will has been produced. For if the will was in
existence at the time of death, even though it may have been subsequently
destroyed, praetorian possession of the estate can be granted, because it is
true that there once was a will.


* 37.III. CONCERNING THE PRAETORIAN POSSESSION OF PROPERTY GRANTED TO AN INSANE PERSON, AN INFANT, OR ONE WHO IS DUMB, DEAF, OR BLIND.

1. Papinianus, Questions, Book XV.
Titius was substituted as the heir of an insane person. The time prescribed for
demanding praetorian possession does not run either against the appointed heir,
or the substitute, as long as the insane person remains in the same condition,
and if the curator of one who is insane acquires possession in his name, the
time fixed for making the claim by those who are aware of the facts will not
run against him. For a father can demand possession in behalf of his infant
child, but if he fails to do so, the child will not, for that reason, be
excluded. But what must be done if the curator refuses to make the application?
Will it not be more just and proper to give possession to the next of kin to
prevent the property from being without an owner ? If this is admitted, the
substitute can be compelled to give security to all those to whom the property
should be transferred, if the appointed heir should die while insane, or if,
having recovered his senses, he should afterwards die before accepting the
estate; for the substitute himself might die during the lifetime of the insane
person, and still he would not interfere with the claims of the others, if he
himself should die before acquiring the estate.
2. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIX.
A person who is dumb, deaf, or blind, can obtain praetorian possession of
property, if he understands what is taking place.


* 37.IV. CONCERNING THE PRAETORIAN POSSESSION OF PROPERTY CONTRARY TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE WILL.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIX.
We must understand the term &quot;children&quot; when used with reference to
the praetorian possession of an estate contrary to the provisions of
the will, to mean either natural or adopted children, where they have either
been appointed heirs, nor disinherited.
(1) Moreover, children are called to the praetorian possession of an estate
contrary to the provisions of the will by the same right, and in the same
order, in which they are called to the succession under the
Civil Law.
(2) This general principle is also held to apply to posthumous children.
(3) Pomponius thinks that where children return from captivity by the enemy,
and enjoy the right of postliminium,they can be admitted to praetorian
possession contrary to the provisions of the will.
(4) Where one of three sons has been taken prisoner by the enemy, the two
remaining ones who are at home will be entitled to praetorian possession of
two-thirds of the estate.
(5) The same rule applies to a posthumous child, for as long as his birth is
expected, he will be entitled to a share of the estate.
(6) The Praetor gives possession of property to children who are their own
masters. For if they have been emancipated, or released from parental control
in some other manner, they are allowed to acquire possession of the estate; but
this is not the case with an adopted child, since, in order for it to be
admitted to praetorian possession, it must be included in the number of
children.
(7) A certain man had a son, and a grandson by the latter. He emancipated his
son, and adopted him instead of his grandson, and then emancipated him a second
time. The question arose whether he prejudiced the rights of the grandson. The
better opinion seems to me to be that the grandson was not excluded, as his
father either remained adopted as a grandson, or was emancipated. For I think
that the father, having once been emancipated, the grandson, together with his
father, should, under the terms of the Edict, be entitled to possession
of the estate.
(8) A man had a son, and by him a grandson; the son was emancipated, or, having
remained under his father's control, was banished. The question arose whether
this would prejudice the rights of the grandson. The better opinion is that, in
either instance, the grandson should be permitted to have praetorian possession
of the estate, for persons who are banished are considered to be dead.
(9) Where a father and his son were both banished, and both regained their
rights, we say that the son ought to be admitted to praetorian possession of
the estate. Where, however, the son was sentenced to the mines, or to any other
punishment equivalent to servitude, and was afterwards restored to his rights,
he will, nevertheless, be admitted to praetorian possession of the estate; but
this will not be the case if he should not be restored to his former condition.
2. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book III.The same rule will apply if the
father should be condemned to penal servitude, and should afterwards regain his
rights.
3. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIX.
Not only are emancipated children themselves admitted to the praetorian
possession of property, but also their children as well.
(1) Where a man has two grandsons, and after emancipating one of them adopts
him instead of his son, let us see whether he alone will be entitled to
praetorian possession as a son. This is based upon the presumption that the
deceased adopted the said grandson as his son, and as the father of the other
grandson whom he retained under his control.
In this case it is better to hold that he alone will be entitled to possession
of the estate under the Praetorian Law.
(2) But if the said grandson should be emancipated, it is preferable to
conclude that he will not be entitled to possession in the capacity of a son.
For this so called son is not included in the number of children, as his right
acquired by adoption has been lost by emancipation.
(3) If I have a son, and by him a grandson, and adopt the grandson instead of
the son, both will be entitled to praetorian possession; but it is clear that
if the grandson should be emancipated he will not be permitted to have
possession because his father takes precedence of him.
(4) If anyone, after having been emancipated, should give his son to his father
to be adopted as his own son, it is perfectly just that all rights to which any
other arrogated child is entitled should be conceded to him, and therefore he
ought to be joined with his father, when praetorian possession of an estate is
granted.
If the said grandson should be emancipated after his adoption, it will be
perfectly just for him to be excluded, for then he resumes his proper place,
and should not be joined with his father.
(5) If an emancipated son marries a woman without the consent of his father,
and a child is born to him, and his father having died, the said grandson
applies to be placed in possession of the estate of his grandfather, his
application should be granted. For, by setting aside the emancipation by the
Praetor, a legitimate son does not lose his rights as such; for a rescission of
the emancipation is made in order that the children may, the more readily,
obtain praetorian possession of the estate, and not be excluded from it.
And even if the son should marry a woman of such bad character that marriage to
her would be dishonorable to himself, as well as to his father, still, we say
that a child born of the said woman should be permitted to obtain possession of
the property of the estate, as his grandfather could have availed himself of
his right to disinherit him. In the decision of a case where the will has been
attacked as inofficious, the magistrate who has jurisdiction, in rendering
judgment must weigh the merits of the grandson as well as the offences of the
father.
(6) Where an emancipated son, who was passed over, gives himself to be
arrogated before an application for praetorian possession of the estate is
made, he loses his right to demand possession contrary to the provisions of the
will.
(7) Where anyone gives his grandson, whom he has under his control, in adoption
to his emancipated son, the father of said grandson will be permitted to take
possession of the estate of the grandfather, contrary to the provisions of the
will, if his father is already dead, because he belongs to his family; and he
himself can be permitted to take possession of the estate contrary to the
provisions of the will.
(8) The same rule applies where an emancipated son gives his own son, who was
born after his emancipation, to his father, in adoption, and then dies; for, in
this instance, the said grandson should be permitted to acquire possession of
the estate of his father, just as if he did not belong to another family.
(9) Where a father enters a family by adoption, and his son does not, can the
son acquire possession of the estate of his father who died while a member of
the adoptive family ? I think that the more equitable opinion is, that the son,
although he may not belong to the same family as his father, should still be
permitted to take possession of the property of his estate under the Praetorian
Law.
(10) Children who cannot legally be appointed heirs are not entitled to demand
possession of an estate contrary to the provisions of the will. The words,
&quot;Cannot be appointed,&quot; refer to the time of the death of their
father.
(11) Where one of several children is appointed heir, he should not be
permitted to take possession of the estate in opposition to the provisions of
the will. For if he was entitled to possession under the will, what good would
it do to give him possession in opposition to it? It is clear that, if another
child should have recourse to the Edict, he would be entitled to possession
contrary to the provisions of the will.
(12) Where, however, anyone is appointed heir under a condition, he cannot
obtain possession of the estate in opposition to the will; and this was stated
by Julianus in the Twenty-third Book of the Digest. But what if the condition
should not be complied with? It is true that then he could obtain possession
contrary to the provisions of the will.
(13) If an emancipated son should be appointed heir under a condition which it
is not in his power to comply with, he can receive praetorian possession of the
estate contrary to the provisions of the will; and he ought to receive it,
because he was appointed heir, but he cannot obtain it contrary to the
provisions of the will. If, however, the condition should not be fulfilled, he
must be protected by the Praetor to the same extent as if he had obtained
possession contrary to the provisions
of the will.
(14) Even if a grandson is appointed heir under a condition of this kind, the
same rule will apply.
(15) Where one of several children is not appointed heir, but his slave is
appointed, and he orders him to accept the estate, possession contrary to the
provisions of the will should be denied him.
(16) The same rule applies if the child should prefer to take what was left to
him, or to his slave; for, in this instance, the possession of the estate
contrary to the provisions of the will should be refused him.
4. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XLI.
It should be noted that the possession of property contrary to the provisions
of the will is promised to children whether there is an heir, or not. And this
is the reason why we say that the children have a right to the possession of
the estate in opposition to the will itself.
The contrary rule applies to the case of a patron.
(1) Where anyone appoints an heir whom he has under his control, or disinherits
him, and passes over a grandson by him, there is no ground for the application
of the Praetorian Law, because the grandson will not be his legal heir.
This rule is also applicable to more distant degrees of relationship.
(2) The Edict granting possession contrary to the provisions of a will does not
apply to the wills of women because they have no heirs-at-law.
(3) Where an unborn child is passed over, another child, who has been appointed
heir to his father, can be permitted to take possession of the property of the
estate, even before the birth of the child first mentioned; because it would be
unjust for an heir, who was not appointed, to claim possession of the estate,
so long as such possession can be demanded contrary to the provisions of the
will, and possession cannot be granted contrary to the provisions of the will,
as long as the child who has been passed over is not yet born; and even if he
should die before birth he will, nevertheless, transmit the right of possession
of the estate to his heir. This is especially necessary where an emancipated
child has been appointed heir, as, in the meantime, he cannot enter upon the
estate.
5. Julianus, Digest, Book XXIV.
If, however, the children should die before demanding praetorian possession of
the estate, it will not be unjust for the Praetor to decide that their heirs
shall have the advantage of possession, either in compliance with the
provisions of the will, or in opposition to the same.
6. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XL.
Where an emancipated son has a son and then dies, and the grandfather dies
afterwards, the grandson will be entitled to praetorian possession of the
estate of his grandfather.
(1) Where the grandfather has emancipated his son and grandson, the grandson
will not be entitled to his estate during the lifetime of the son, but after
the death of his father he will be entitled to praetorian possession of the
estate of his grandfather.
(2) If the grandson alone should be emancipated, and the grandfather, and then
his father, should die, the grandson, who has been emancipated, will be
entitled to the estate of his father, under the Praetorian Edict, because he
would be the heir of his father if he had not been freed from the control of
his grandfather.
(3) Where a son has been emancipated, and the grandson retained under the
control of the grandfather, and both of them have been passed over, both will
be entitled to possession of the estate under the Praetorian Law.
(4) If the son who has been emancipated belonged to an adoptive family, and has
ason, the grandson will not be entitled to the possession of the estate of the
natural grandfather under the Praetorian Edict. And even if the emancipated
son, after having had sons born to him, should give himself in adoption, the
same rule will apply.
It is clear that if a child born in the family of the adoptive grandfather
should be emancipated, he will be entitled to praetorian possession of the
estate of his natural grandfather. Adoption does not prejudice the rights of a
child, so long as he remains in a strange family. Moreover, if he is
emancipated, he can obtain possession of the estate of his parents under the
Praetorian Edict; provided that he is emancipated during their lifetime, and
not after their death; for it is certain that he cannot be emancipated after
their decease.
7. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XIV.
If a son should be emancipated, and his son retained under the control of his
grandfather, the grandson, during the lifetime of his grandfather, will be
permitted to obtain praetorian possession of the estate of his father.
8. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XL.
The Praetor does not think that children who have been disgraced by
disinheritance, and excluded from the succession, should be permitted to obtain
praetorian possession, in opposition to the terms of the will, just as by the
Civil Law, they do not prevent the execution of the will of their parents; for,
under these circumstances, they have the right to attack the will as
inofficious, if they desire to do so.
(1) It is not sufficient for an heir to be disinherited by this being stated in
any part of the will, but he must be specifically mentioned as belonging to
that degree against which the possession of an estate is claimed under the
Praetorian Law. Hence, if the son should be disinherited in the first degree,
and passed over in the second, and the heirs appointed in the first degree do
not demand praetorian possession of the estate, the said son can obtain
possession of the same in opposition to the terms of the will.
(2) Every disinheritance does not bar a child from obtaining possession of an
estate contrary to the provisions of the will, but only where this is legally
done.
(3) When the son who is disinherited is one of several heirs, Marcellus, in the
Ninth Book of the Digest, says that he is not considered to be disinherited,
and therefore he can claim possession under the Praetorian Law, in opposition
to the terms of the will, against any of the other heirs.
(4) If a son is disinherited, and then appointed heir, and the degree in which
he is appointed takes effect, I think the Edict will become operative with
reference to the other son, and that he can demand praetorian possession of the
estate in opposition to the terms of
the will.
(5) Where a son is passed over in the first degree, and disinherited in the
second, and the heirs appointed in the first degree die before the
death of the testator, it must be said that the son who has been passed over
will not be entitled to praetorian possession of the estate in opposition to
the terms of the will; for the condition of the estate with reference to the
second degree is such that it cannot be entered upon in the first degree, nor
can praetorian possession of it be claimed.
If, however, the appointed heir should die after the death of the testator,
Marcellus holds that the right of praetorian possession of the estate, contrary
to the provisions of the will, having once vested in the son, he will continue
to be entitled to it. And even if the condition upon which the appointment of
the heir depended should fail to be fulfilled, he also says that the son who
was passed over in that degree can also claim praetorian possession contrary to
the provisions of the will.
He also says that the same rule will apply even if a posthumous child, who was
appointed the heir, should not be born; for he holds that, in this instance,
the son will be entitled to praetorian possession of the estate in opposition
to the terms of the will.
(6) Where anyone writes his disinheritance with his own hand, let us consider
whether he can obtain praetorian possession of the estate contrary to the
provisions of the will. Marcellus, in the Ninth Book of the Digest, says that a
disinheritance of this kind will prejudice his rights, because the Senate has
not prescribed that, where anyone performs some act against himself, it shall
be considered as not having been written.
(7) Where anyone, after having disinherited his emancipated son, arrogates him,
Papinianus, in the Twelfth Book of Questions, says that natural rights will
always prevail in a case of this kind, and therefore that such a disinheritance
will prejudice the son.
(8) With reference to a stranger, however, he adopts the opinion of Marcellus
that disinheritance will not prejudice his rights, if he should subsequently be
arrogated by his father.
(9) Where a son has returned from captivity under the right of postliminium,it
must be said that disinheritance previously made will injure him.
(10) If a natural father should disinherit his son while he belongs to an
adoptive father, and afterwards his son is emancipated, the disinheritance will
prejudice his rights.
(11) The Praetor does not wish that children who have been given in adoption
should be excluded from the possession of an estate, provided they are the
appointed heirs; and Labeo says that his decision is most just, for the
children are not entirely strangers. Therefore, if they should be appointed
heirs, they can obtain praetorian possession of the estate in opposition to the
terms of the will; but they themselves, alone, cannot render the Edict
operative, unless one of those who have been passed over can cause it to be
applicable. If, however, this child should not be appointed heir, but another
person, who can acquire the estate for him, is, there will be no reason why we
should permit him to obtain possession contrary to the provisions of the will.
(12) Moreover, in order that these children should be permitted to obtain
praetorian possession, they must be the direct descendants of
the testator, for if I have given in adoption a son, whom I myself have
adopted, and the Edict is rendered operative by my other children, praetorian
possession of the estate contrary to the provisions of the will shall not be
granted to the aforesaid child.
(13) Praetorian possession in opposition to the terms of the will is also
granted to a child belonging to an adoptive family, if he is appointed heir in
the degree against which possession of the estate can be demanded.
(14) It is not surprising that an emancipated son, who has been passed over,
should be able to confer upon the appointed heirs greater rights than they
would have been entitled to, if they had remained the sole heirs; for if a son,
who was under the control of his father, is appointed heir to a fourth part of
his estate, and another son, who has been emancipated, is passed over, he will
receive half of the estate through the emancipated son, and if he did not have
an emancipated brother, he would only be entitled to a twelfth part of the
property.
Where an heir is only appointed for a very small share of an estate, and the
Edict is applicable, he will be not only entitled to the enjoyment of the share
to which he was appointed heir, but he can obtain much more through praetorian
possession. For the Praetor, when he grants possession of an estate in
opposition to the terms of the will, decides to give those shares to each of
the children which they would have been entitled to, if their father had died
intestate, and the child had remained under his control. Therefore, whether the
child who was emancipated, or remained under his control, or was given in
adoption, was appointed heir to a small share of the estate, he will not be
restricted to that portion of the same to which he was appointed heir, but will
be entitled to a full share.
9. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XIV.
It makes no difference whether the adoptive father is living or dead, for the
only inquiry made is whether the child belongs to the adoptive family.
10. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XL.
If, after the death of the testator, the appointed heir should give himself in
adoption, he can obtain praetorian possession of the estate contrary to the
provisions of the will, because the adoption of the appointed heir does not
prejudice other heirs mentioned in the will.
(1) If a son should be given in adoption to his maternal grandfather by his
natural father, and the Edict takes effect with reference to another child, the
better opinion is that the latter can obtain possession of the estate; for we
do not require him to enter upon it, but it is sufficient for it to be
transferred to him, and that it can be legally acquired.
(2) Where a son is given in adoption, and, after having accepted the estate by
the order of his adoptive father, he is emancipated, he can obtain praetorian
possession of the estate in opposition to the terms of the will; for he himself
will be more entitled to it than the adoptive father.
(3) It should be noted that if a son given in adoption should enter upon the
estate, possession will be granted to him contrary to the provisions of the
will; but, on the other hand, if anyone should receive a legacy or a share of
the estate, he will be excluded from praetorian possession contrary to the
terms of the will.
(4) Children who are not entitled to possession contrary to the provisions of
the will cannot even obtain a share of the estate, if the Edict is applicable;
for what good would it do to favor them and enable them to have a portion of
it, since they are not entitled to anything?
(5) Children who have been disinherited cannot render the Edict operative,
hence they cannot be joined with the others when the latter obtain possession
of an estate under the Praetorian Law; and they have only one ground of
complaint, that is, to allege that the will is inofficious.
(6) Those who demand praetorian possession in opposition to the terms of the
will, for the benefit of others, do not wait until those children who have been
passed over make application for possession, but they themselves can demand it
at any time. For, having been once admitted to obtain it for the benefit of
others, they do not concern themselves as to whether the former heirs intend to
demand it or not.
11. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XLI.
Where a son given in adoption is appointed heir by his natural father, and
another claims the benefit of the Edict contrary to the provisions of the will,
the latter will be entitled to the preference. If, however, the condition
should fail to be fulfilled, he will be excluded from possession.
I think that this also applies to him who has been absolutely appointed an
heir, but that was not done in conformity to law.
(1) Praetorian possession of an estate contrary to the provisions of the will
is divided in the same manner as legal succession on the ground of intestacy.
Hence grandsons by one son will have a single share between them.
12. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XIV.
Where two sons together with two grandsons by another son are entitled to
praetorian possession of an estate, and one of the grandsons does not claim it,
his share will accrue to his brother; but if one of the sons does not claim
possession, his brother, as well as the grandsons, will profit by it, for then
the estate will be divided into two equal parts, of which the son will obtain
one, and the grandsons the other.
(1) Where there are two wills, and one, by which a son is disinherited, is
pr'operly drawn up, and the second, in which the son is passed over is
imperfect, he who is passed over in the last will can legally claim praetorian
possession of the estate, if the heirs mentioned in the second will are such as
should have preference over those mentioned in the first, in case the son
should be excluded. Hence the rule is established that, when he against whom
the son claims praetorian possession of the estate can obtain it if the son
should be excluded, the latter also
can legally demand praetorian possession, but if he could not obtain the
estate, the son will also be excluded.
13. Julianus, Digest, Book XXIII.
Where an emancipated son obtains praetorian possession of an estate in
opposition to the terms of the will, the appointed heir will be compelled to
surrender to him the lands and slaves belonging to the estate; for it is only
just that everything which the appointed heir has obtained from the estate
should be transferred to him whom the Praetor has appointed in his place.
(1) Where anyone has two sons, and gives in adoption a grandson by one of them,
and appoints him his heir, after having passed over the other son, the question
arises what rule should be followed in this instance, and whether the grandson
should obtain merely the share of his father, or a full share of the
inheritance. I answered that where a grandson is given in adoption and
appointed an heir, as long as his father is under the control of another, or is
emancipated, he cannot obtain praetorian possession in opposition to the terms
of the will. If, however, his father should die before obtaining praetorian
possession of the estate, the grandson will not be permitted to claim it.
(2) If a father, after having passed over an emancipated son, should appoint
his other two sons his heirs, one of them being still under his control, and
the other given in adoption, and two grandsons by the latter belonging to the
family were also passed over in the will, the emancipated son, the son who
remained under his father's control, and the one given in adoption, together
with his two children, can each demand possession of a third of the estate, in
such a way that the last one mentioned will be entitled to a sixth, and his
children to another sixth of the same.
(3) Where a father, who had two sons, emancipated one of them who himself had
children, and afterwards adopted one of the grandsons whom he had previously
emancipated, instead of his son, died after having passed over the emancipated
son in his will, it would be but just to grant relief to the grandson who took
the place of the son, and for the estate to be divided into three parts, in
such a way that the son who remained under the control of his father should
have one; the grandson who was adopted instead of the son, another; and the
emancipated son, along with his own son who took the place of the grandson, the
third. And even if the son should die and another of the grandsons be adopted
in his stead, the estate must be divided into three parts, and it would be
equitable for the grandson, who was adopted instead of the son, not to have
less than he would have had if he had not been included among the grandsons,
but a stranger had been adopted.
14. Africanus, Questions, Book IV.
If of two sons who had been emancipated one was appointed an heir, and the
other was passed over in the will, and the one appointed should enter upon the
estate, it is held that, although a case of this kind is not expressly referred
to by the terms of the Edict, still, the son who
was appointed heir cannot demand praetorian possession of the estate because he
has accepted the will of his father. For the Edict does not permit an
emancipated son to obtain praetorian possession if he has received the legacy,
whether he received it from the appointed heir, or from those who under the
Praetorian Law claim possession contrary to the provisions of the will.
It must, however, be observed that the Praetor should protect the appointed
heir who accepts the share of the estate left him by the will, provided he does
not receive a larger share of the same than he would have been entitled to, if
he had obtained praetorian possession; and it is in this respect only that he
can prejudice himself. But if he was appointed heir to a small portion of the
estate, he can only retain that portion, and he will be compelled to pay any
legacies which may be due to foreign heirs.
Where the appointed heir is under paternal control, and he becomes a necessary
heir, it may be said that he can demand praetorian possession of the estate,
provided he has not interfered in its affairs, for if he has, he will be
considered to occupy the same position as an emancipated son, because he has
approved the will of his father.
(1) A son, while a member of an adoptive family, married and had a son, and
emancipated him after the death of his adoptive father. It was held that his
grandson could, by a decree of the Praetor, claim possession of the property of
the estate of his natural grandfather, in opposition to the will of the latter.
Again, if an emancipated son, after having himself had a son, and emancipated
him, should give himself to be arrogated, and die after the death of his
adoptive father, there can be no doubt that, under a decree of the Praetor, he
would be entitled to praetorian possession contrary to the provisions of the
wills of his father and grandfather, in order to prevent him from otherwise
being excluded from the estate of both of them.
15. Marciamis, Rules, Book V.
Where an emancipated son is passed over in a will, I do not think that he can
claim praetorian possession of the estate in opposition to the terms of the
will, if the appointed heir should interpose an exception on the ground of
fraud, based on a debt which he owed his father; for, in this instance, he has,
as it were, abandoned the right to claim praetorian possession of the estate.
This, however, must be understood to be applicable where the son was not
willing to bar the heir claiming the debt, by means of the exception, &quot;If
possession of the estate contrary to the provisions of the will cannot be
granted to the son,&quot; but prefers to avail himself of an exception on the
ground of bad faith.
16. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book IV.
If an emancipated son should leave his son under the control of the grandfather
of the latter, and charge a foreign heir under a trust to transfer his estate
to him, if he should be released from the control of
his grandfather, possession of the estate ought not to be given to the
grandfather by the Praetorian Law, if there was reason to think that he would
waste the property of the grandson.
17. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXV.
If a father should give himself in adoption, and his son should not follow him
on account of his having been previously emancipated, the son will not be
permitted to demand praetorian possession of his father's estate, because the
latter belonged to one family and the son is a member of another. This opinion
was also adopted by Julianus.
Marcellus, however, says that it seems to him to be unjust that the son should
be excluded from praetorian possession of the estate, for the reason that his
father gave himself in adoption, for when a son does not give himself in
adoption and his father does, this leaves the son without any father; which
opinion is not unreasonable.
18. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book III.
Where, however, a son is disinherited under a condition, and demands praetorian
possession of the estate contrary to the provisions of the will, even though he
may have been appointed heir under a condition, he shall be excluded from
possession of the estate; for children are deprived of the estates of their
parents in consequence of a positive
resolution.
(1) The retention of a legacy and of a donation mortis causa,as well as the
execution of a trust is refused to one who has obtained praetorian possession
of an estate in opposition to the terms of the will; and it makes no difference
whether the bequest was acquired directly, or by the intervention of another.
19. Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book XV.
When it is said that praetorian possession of an estate contrary to the
provisions of the will is granted to children, this should be understood to
mean that it is sufficient that there was a will at the time of the death of
their father, under which they could either accept the estate, or demand
possession of it under the Praetorian Edict; although neither of these things
was done, or could have been done afterwards. For if all the appointed heirs
and their substitutes should die before the testator, and an heir should be
appointed who was not capable of taking under the will, it would be useless to
claim possession contrary to the provisions of the will, which would be
absolutely without effect.
20. The Same, Disputations, Book XIX.
A testator disinherited his son, who was under his control, and passed over
another whom he had emancipated. The question arose under what circumstances
the emancipated son would be entitled to praetorian possession of the estate. I
answered that if the foreign heirs who were appointed should accept the estate,
the son who remained under the control of his father would be excluded. If,
however, the said heirs should reject it, which they could easily do, as they
could obtain
nothing from it on account of him who was entitled to praetorian possession
contrary to the provisions of the will, and because the son who had remained
under the control of his father, having become his own master, would be the
heir-at-law of his father; still, the emancipated son, having demanded
praetorian possession in opposition to the terms of the will, would alone be
entitled to it. But, as disinheritance is of no force or effect, where an
estate is not accepted under the will, Julianus very properly holds that this
should not prevent the disinherited son from acquiring praetorian possession of
the estate of his father contrary to the provisions of the will. In order to
prevent a will, void in every other respect, from seeming to be effective
solely so far as the reproach of disinheritance is concerned, the matter is
referred to the death of the intestate, so that the Praetor may protect the
emancipated son against the direct and sole heir-at-law, and secure for him
half of the inheritance.
Therefore the benefit to be obtained from the appointed foreign heir is
purchaseable, and as he can legally obtain nothing of the estate, by entering
upon the same he can exclude the son remaining under parental control, and by
law will transfer it in its entirety to the emancipated son, in opposition to
the terms of the will.
If, however, the appointed heir should reject the estate, he will render the
disinherited heir, who now becomes the sole heir, entitled to his share of the
same. For, just as the Praetor protects the emancipated heir when an estate is
not entered upon, so the son who remained under his father's control should not
be absolutely excluded in case the estate should be accepted; but he will be
permitted to claim it, as against the emancipated son, on the ground that the
will is inofficious.
(1) Let us see, however, where both heirs obtain the estate of their father,
whether the one who has been emancipated is subject to contribution to the
other, as he is not obliged to do this by the terms of the Section of the Edict
under which he obtains praetorian possession in opposition to the terms of the
will, since it directs security for contribution to be furnished by the
emancipated heir, to those to whom possession of the estate is given. For the
heir who is under the control of his father is not called to the praetorian
possession of the estate contrary to the provisions of the will, because he was
expressly disinherited. Nor is contribution required by that Section of the
Edict under which the emancipated son is permitted to obtain praetorian
possession after his father has died intestate, for the reason that although
his brother may be the heir-at-law; still, the emancipated son does not obtain
praetorian possession of the estate on account of the above mentioned Section.
I fear that the act of the appointed heir, who rejects the estate, will not be
of any benefit to the son, except to enable him to obtain half of the estate of
his father; but by it he will not acquire half of the property of the son who
was emancipated. In a case of this kind the result will be that, if the heir
who is under the control of his father is appointed to a smaller share than he
would otherwise have been entitled to, and if his emancipated brother has
obtained praetorian
possession of the estate, although contribution is indicated by the words of
the Edict, still by the decision of the Praetor this advantage will be denied
him.
There is, however, much more reason that he should not be benefited by
contribution, because, having been disinherited by his father, he is not called
to the praetorian possession of the estate in opposition to the terms of the
will; and on account of the rejection of the estate by the appointed heir, he
will not be entitled to anything, because the emancipated son, having obtained
possession contrary to the provisions of the will from the Praetor, occupies
the position of the proper
heir.
(2) The said emancipated son will be compelled to pay out of his share any
legacies bequeathed to children, and ascendants of the deceased, not all of
them, but only half; because of what remains of the inheritance for the son
under paternal control. There is, however, no cause for the legatees to bring
suit against him, since he is rightfully the heir at law. But where he received
praetorian possession of the estate in opposition to the terms of the will,
even if the estate should not be accepted by the appointed heir, he must pay
the legacies granted by that part of the will in opposition to which he
obtained possession of the estate. Therefore, in this instance, the condition
of the son who remains under paternal control will, in fact, be better than if
he had not been disinherited.
21. Modestinus, Pandects, Book VI.
Where a man has a son, and by him a grandson under his control, and gives his
son in adoption, but retains his grandson under his authority, and his son,
having subsequently been emancipated by his adoptive father, dies, after
appointing foreign heirs, the son of the one who remained under the control of
his grandfather can demand praetorian possession of the estate of his father,
although he may never have been under his control. Hence it is held that it is
not indispensable for him to have been under his control; for if it is decided
otherwise, and the son should not be emancipated, the grandson of him who
remained under the control of his grandfather can demand praetorian possession
of the estate contrary to the provisions of the
will.
(1) The same rule of law applies where a son, having been emancipated, a
grandson by him remains under the control of his grandfather, and is afterwards
given in adoption to his father; that is to say, he can demand praetorian
possession of the estate of his grandfather in opposition to the terms of his
will, because by this adoption he does not become a member of another family.
(2) If, however, my emancipated son should adopt a stranger as his son, the
said adoptive son cannot demand praetorian possession of my estate contrary to
the provisions of my will, for the reason that he never sustained the relation
of grandson to me.


* 37.V. CONCERNING THE PAYMENT OF LEGACIES WHERE PRAETORIAN POSSESSION OF AN ESTATE IS OBTAINED CONTRARY TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE WILL.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XL.
This Title treats of a principle of natural equity which is introduced for a
definite purpose; that is, in order to compel those who render a will of no
effect by obtaining possession in opposition to its provisions to pay legacies
and execute trusts for the benefit of certain persons, namely, children and
ascendants, wives and daughters-in-law, to whom bequests of dowries have been
made.
(1) The Praetor employs the terms ascendants and children in a general sense,
and does not specify the different degrees of relationship ; hence, payment
must be made to them ad infinitum.Nor has the Praetor designated the different
persons, or whether they belong to the male or the female sex. Therefore,
anyone either in the ascending or descending line is permitted to claim his
legacy; provided, however, the tie of blood-relationship exists between them.
(2) We permit those children also to claim their legacies who have been given
in adoption by the testator, or who are adoptive, in case they still remain
children until his death.
(3) Legacies bequeathed to posthumous descendants shall also be paid.
2. Julianus, Digest, Book XXIII.
Therefore, if a son should be emancipated while his wife was pregnant, and
receive praetorian possession of an estate in opposition to the terms of the
will, he will be obliged to pay a legacy bequeathed to the grandson.
3. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XL.
Where, however, donations mortis causahave been made, I think that they should
be sustained; but if they are given to different persons than those above
mentioned, it is my opinion that the recipients should be deprived of them.
(1) The Prsetor, however, had in mind only descendants and ascendants, for he
does not include a legacy left to a brother or a sister.
(2) Moreover, that solely is owing which was left directly to the ascendants or
descendants; for if anything should be bequeathed to a slave belonging to them,
or to a person subject to their authority, they will not be entitled to it, for
we do not ask by whom the legacy is acquired, but who has received the honor.
(3) Where, however, a legacy is bequeathed conjointly to one of the above-
mentioned persons and to another to whom payment should not be made, only the
portion belonging to the former will be preserved.
(4) Likewise, if any one of those persons is charged to pay to a stranger a
legacy which was left to himself, it must be said that it should not be paid,
because he will obtain no advantage thereby.
(5) If you suggest a case where a legacy is bequeathed to a stranger, and he is
charged to pay it to one of the descendants or ascendants of the testator, we
hold that, under the circumstances, it should be paid.
(6) Moreover, if a bequest is left to a stranger under the condition that he
shall pay it to one of the descendants of the testator, it is perfectly just to
say that the Prsetor ought not to refuse him an action to recover it.
(7) Again, only those legacies which are legally bequeathed should be paid by
the persons who obtain praetorian possession of the estate contrary to the
provisions of the will. Hence it is true that they are not payable where a son
obtains praetorian possession in opposition to the terms of the will.
4. Julianus, Digest, Book XXIII.
On this account it frequently happens that heirs who have been appointed reject
the estate, because they know that an emancipated son has either demanded, or
is about to demand, possession contrary to the provisions of the will.
5. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XL.
A testator appointed his son, who was under the age of puberty, his heir, and
appointed a substitute for him, but passed over his emancipated son; and both
sons afterwards obtained praetorian possession of the estate. Certain legacies
were bequeathed which were to be paid by the substitute of the minor, not only
to descendants and ascendants, but also to strangers.
The question arises, if the child under puberty should die, whether the
substitute would be compelled to pay the legacies. It may be stated that if the
said minor is charged with the legacies, they must be paid only to the
descendants or ascendants of the testator; but if the substitute of the minor
was charged with their payment, he must pay them to all the legatees, after
taking into account the Falcidian Law; that is to say, he can retain the fourth
of the half of the estate of the father which came into his hands, or an eighth
of the entire estate.
(1) If the said child under the age of puberty should be appointed heir to only
one-twelfth of the estate, .the better opinion is that the substitute must
subject half of the assets to contribution and then pay the legacies, after
having retained the fourth allowed by the Falcidian Law; for, even if the minor
was appointed heir only to a twelfth of the estate, still, the accrual will
increase the legacies with which the substitute is charged.
(2) The Prsetor, moreover, desires that legacies should be paid to all the
children, excepting those to whom he grants possession contrary to the
provisions of the will, for the reasons above mentioned;
since he does not think that they should be permitted to claim the legacies
bequeathed to them after he has granted them praetorian possession. Hence a
child should determine whether he prefers to demand praetorian possession in
opposition to the terms of the will, or to claim his legacy. If he should elect
to proceed against the will, he will not be entitled to the legacy; if he
should accept the legacy, he cannot claim praetorian possession contrary to the
provisions of the will; which is our present practice.
(3) Where anyone obtains praetorian possession of an estate in opposition to
the terms of the will, and it afterwards should appear that he is not one of
the children who is entitled to it, but still is one of those to whom legacies
should be paid, it has been established that he shall not be deprived of the
right to claim his legacy, whether by the ordinary proceeding under the
Praetorian Law, or by that authorized by the Carbonian Edict.1
(4) Again, a legacy may be refused not only if a person has obtained praetorian
possession, but also if he has received anything by the will of the deceased.
The result is, as Julianus says, that if an heir, who has obtained praetorian
possession of the estate contrary to the provisions of the will, had already
been appointed a substitute for his brother, who was under the age of puberty,
in case of the death of his minor brother, he will be refused an action to
recover his estate.
(5) Where legacies are bequeathed to the children of the testator, and to
strangers, although the deduction prescribed by the Falcidian Law will be made
in the case of all of them, and will diminish the legacies of the children;
still, for the reason that the legacies will not be paid to the strangers,
those of the children will be increased.
1 The Carbonian Edict was applicable to the case of a minor heir whose claim to
the estate was disputed, either on the ground that he was not the next of kin
to the deceased, or, where he was yet unborn and had been appointed under the
will, that he was not the issue of the testator, was a slave, or had been
fraudulently substituted for a genuine birth. Except in the latter instance, it
was essential that possession should be granted contrary to the provisions of
the will, or that intestate succession should be involved. If any doubt was
found to exist after proper investigation, the benefit of it was given to the
child, the presumption being in its favor, and it was placed in possession of
the estate until it arrived at puberty, when the question was finally
determined.
This possession was not granted merely to protect the alleged rights of the
child, as where a creditor was authorized by the Prater to enter upon the
estate to secure his claim, or a legatee to prevent the loss of his bequest;
for it carried with it the enjoyment of many important privileges. The child
who obtained prsetorian possession under these circumstances was entitled to
such maintenance, education, and care to be paid for out of the assets, as were
in conformity to his present status in life, and his presumed title to the
inheritance. Although required to give bond to the adverse party, still,
nothing expended for his benefit, through the agency of his curator, could
subsequently be recovered, in case he was unable to establish his right to the
estate.
In this instance, as in all others involving the protection of minors, the
Roman Law manifested its earnest solicitude for those who were incapable of
self-defence, even to the point of diminishing the property of an estate to
prevent the possible infliction of injustice upon one whose youth and
helplessness would otherwise have rendered him the easy prey of an unscrupulous
claimant.ED.
(6) If, however, a share of the estate should be bequeathed to one of the
descendants or ascendants, must it be preserved for him in the same way as is
customary with legacies? Julianus very properly holds that, in this instance,
the same rule should be observed with reference to a share of the estate, as
has been adopted with respect to a legacy.
This opinion is approved by a Rescript of the Divine Pius, as estates are not
only bestowed by an honorable title, but such testamentary dispositions are
also invested with greater distinction than where mere legacies are bequeathed.
(7) Moreover, relief should be granted persons of this kind to the extent,
however, of protecting only their full shares, even though they may have been
left a larger portion of the estate; for if they had received a smaller
portion, they would be only entitled to an action to recover as much as had
been bequeathed to them.
The same rule should be observed with reference to legacies, property left in
trust, and donations mortis causa.
(8) Shall he to whom a portion of the estate has been left be compelled to pay
the bequest to all the legatees, or only to certain privileged persons? It is
approved as the better opinion that they should be paid only to the privileged
persons. He, however, will not be the only one to be benefited by this; for if
any share of the estate is charged with legacies, whether to descendants,
ascendants, or strangers, we can entertain no doubt that whatever is not paid
to the strangers will benefit the descendants and ascendants.
Therefore, the only instance where legacies not paid to strangers will accrue
to him who demands praetorian possession in opposition to the terms of a will
is where they should not be paid to legatees who are either descendants or
ascendants.
6. Julianm, Digest, Book XXIII.
Salvius Aristo to Julianus, Greeting. A certain man had an emancipated son,
and, having passed him over in his will, he appointed his father and a stranger
his heirs, and gave his father a legacy in addition. The son demanded
praetorian possession of the estate in opposition to the terms of the will. I
ask, if both the heirs entered upon the estate, or if either of them did, or if
neither of them should have done so, whether the legacy would be payable to the
father, and if so, how much of it he would be entitled to ?
I answered that I have often remarked, that the Section of the Edict by which
an emancipated son who has obtained praetorian possession of an estate contrary
to the provisions of the will is ordered to pay legacies, bequeathed to
children and parents, is somewhat defective ; for if three-fourths of an estate
should be bequeathed to anyone, he to whom it was left would be entitled to
more than the emancipated son. This, therefore, should be regulated by a decree
in such a way that the emancipated son may have his share of the estate, and
that the appointed heir will not receive more than he does; and the amount of
the legacies should be regulated so that no more
will be paid to anyone on this account than will remain in the hands of the
emancipated son by virtue of praetorian possession of the estate.
7. Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book XVI.
For, according to a Constitution of the Divine Pius, addressed to Tuscius
Fuscianus, Governor of Numidia, parents and children, who have been appointed
heirs, should be protected to the amount of their full shares, just as in the
case of legacies, in order that such persons may not obtain any more through
their appointment as heirs than would proportionally come into the hands of one
who had obtained praetorian possession of the estate contrary to the provisions
of the will.
8. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XL.
Let us see what we should understand by the term &quot;full shares.&quot;
Suppose, for instance, that there are two persons who have obtained praetorian
possession contrary to the provisions of the will, and there is only one heir
among the descendants and ascendants, the third of the estate would be the full
share due to each. Where, however, there are three persons who have obtained
praetorian possession in opposition to the terms of the will, the full share
due to each will be one-fourth. This rule is also observed in the case of
legacies.
Where, however, one of the descendants obtains praetorian possession in
opposition to the terms of the will, and several of the descendants and
ascendants have received legacies, we must understand the rule to be, that a
son who has been passed over will be entitled to half of the estate, and that
all the other heirs who are among the number of descendants and ascendants will
be entitled to the remaining half.
(1) Where any one of the descendants or ascendants is appointed an heir, as
well as a legatee, shall we preserve for him only his legal share of the
estate, or shall we also pay him his legacy; or shall we only give him which of
the two he may select? The better opinion is, that both should be preserved for
him, in such a way, however, that in receiving both he shall not have any more
than the share of the estate to which he is entitled.
(2) If he for whom the share is preserved enters upon the estate, the grants of
freedom made by the testator will necessarily become valid through his
acceptance. Nevertheless, we must consider whether he who enters upon the
estate should be liable to an action on the ground of bad faith. The better
opinion is that, if after notice has been served upon him by the heir who was
passed over, he obtained praetorian possession of the estate contrary to the
provisions of the will, he should accept it, promising to pay the other his
full share, he will be somewhat to blame, and will be liable to an action on
the ground of bad faith, for he injures the estate, as the grants of freedom
will become valid.
(3) Where anything has been bequeathed to the wife or daughter-in-law of the
testator over and above her dowry, the excess shall not
be paid, where praetorian possession has been obtained contrary to the
provisions of the will.
(4) There is no doubt, whatever, that by the term &quot;daughter-in-law&quot;
the wives of grandsons and others are not indicated.
(5) Moreover, where a dowry is increased, I do not think that the bequest
should be reduced to the full share, where it was left to the wife or the
daughter-in-law, as these women are entitled to it as a valid debt.
(6) The Praetor not only includes a dowry as a privileged bequest, but also
anything which has been left instead of the dowry; as, for example, where the
dowry consists of certain property, and a sum of money can be bequeathed in its
stead, or vice versa;provided, however, that it is expressly stated that the
money is left in lieu of the dowry.
9. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XLI.
An action will be granted to the woman, even though the legacy is larger than
the dowry.
10. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XL.
I think that the woman should also be protected, even if she has been appointed
heir to a certain portion of the estate in lieu of her dowry.
(1) Moreover, we require that the woman should have been the wife of the
testator at the time of his death. If he left the dowry as a preferred legacy
to his daughter-in-law, and she should be married at the time of his death, the
legacy is void, because the dowry is not yet payable. But as, while the
marriage exists, an action will be granted against the heirs of the father-in-
law, it must be held that the woman has the right to claim this preferred
legacy of her dowry.
(2) He who demands praetorian possession in opposition to the terms of the will
is not obliged to pay all the legacies bequeathed in the different degrees
mentioned in the will, but only those which are bequeathed in that degree
against which he obtained praetorian possession. For possession is sometimes
demanded against another degree in which legacies must be paid; as, for
example, when the testator has established two degrees of heirs, and has passed
over his emancipated son, and still, in both degrees, he bequeathed legacies to
descendants and ascendants.
Julianus says that if anyone appointed in the first degree is living, the
person obtaining praetorian possession must pay the legacies bequeathed to
children and parents in the first degree; if, however, none of them are living,
he must pay those left to persons in the second degree. But if no one belonging
to either the first or the second degree should be alive at the time of the
death of the testator, then, the son who has been passed over would seem to be
entitled to praetorian possession ab intestato,and the legacies need not be
paid to anyone.
If, however, the appointed heirs should die after the death of the testator,
and before the acceptance of the estate, the claim for praetorian possession
would appear to be asserted against them; and any legacies with which they were
charged should not be paid, but only those with which the substitutes have been
charged.
11. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XLI.
Where both the appointed heir and the substitute are living at the time of the
testator's death, we hold that the legacies with which the appointed heir was
charged should be paid, even though no one may enter upon the estate.
12. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XL.
Whether the appointed heirs accept the estate or not, it must be said that the
legacies with which they are charged shall be paid, although those appointed in
the second degree may have accepted the estate, after the first ones have
rejected it.
13. Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book II.
We also hold that legacies with which a substitute is charged are payable where
the appointed heir has failed to comply with a condition, which was not in his
power. For if he should not comply with it when he was able to do so, he should
be considered as occupying the same position as an heir who refuses to accept
an estate, as he will not be entitled to any benefit from it, and deservedly
so, as he did not observe the condition.
14. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIV.
Sometimes a person obtains praetorian possession of an estate contrary to the
provisions of the will, by a right which he enjoys in accordance with its
provisions; for instance, where an emancipated son is appointed the heir, and
another emancipated son is passed over in the will, and the appointed heir
obtains praetorian possession in opposition to the terms of the will, and the
heir who has been passed over fails to apply for it. In this instance, it is
perfectly clear that the former can be compelled to pay all the legacies, just
as if recourse had not been had to the Edict; for the accident of the
emancipated son who was passed over ought not to be a source of profit to the
heir who was appointed, merely because he who was passed over did not avail
himself of his right.
(1) Where a son has been appointed heir by a testator, and is charged with a
legacy to one of his descendants, or ascendants, and together with the others
obtains praetorian possession of the estate in opposition to the terms of the
will; it is better to decide that all those who have obtained praetorian
possession in opposition to the terms of the will should be compelled to pay
this legacy.
15. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XLI.
Where a son who is under paternal control is passed over, he will not be
obliged to pay the legacies, even though he should demand
possession of the estate in opposition to the terms of the will; because he
will obtain the estate on the ground of intestacy, and not through having
claimed praetorian possession. An exception based on fraud will not prejudice
his rights; and it would be absurd for him to be compelled to pay the legacies
because he demanded praetorian pos-.session; as, without this, he would be
entitled to the whole estate as heir at law.
Whence, if there are two heirs who have been passed over, namely, one who has
been emancipated, and the other who was still under paternal control, some
authorities hold that the emancipated heir is ,not obliged to pay the legacies,
because by the act of his brother he obtained half of the estate, when if he
had not made the demand he would have been entitled to all of if.
What, then, should be done when the proper heir is passed over? The rule which
has just been mentioned will apply. Where, however, 'an heir is appointed and
has the will of his father, he should be liable to the legatees, even if he
fails to demand praetorian possession of the estate.
(1) But if one of the sons who was emancipated is appointed heir, and the other
is passed over, and both of them obtain praetorian possession of the estate in
opposition to the terms of the will, the one who was appointed heir, as well as
the one who was passed over, must pay the legacies. If, however, the appointed
heir is the only one who obtained praetorian possession contrary to the
provisions of the will, he must pay the legacies to all the legatees, just as
if he had accepted the estate. But if he should accept the estate, and the one
who was passed over should obtain praetorian possession of the same, the latter
must pay the legacies only to those persons who are privileged.
A question arises with reference to the appointed heir, and many authorities
hold that he should pay the legacies to the privileged persons. I think this
opinion to be correct, since the Praetor protects him, for the reason that he
is one of the children who can demand possession of the estate contrary to the
provisions of the will.
(2) He must also be protected with reference to half of the estate, if he was
appointed heir to a larger share than that amount, or was appointed heir to
exactly one-half. Where he was appointed heir to less than half, we hold that
he should be protected for no larger amount than that to which he was
appointed; for how could he be entitled to more, since he did not obtain
praetorian possession of the estate, and was not appointed heir to a greater
portion ?
(3) No legacy shall be paid to a woman who did not bring any dowry to her
husband, even though it is bequeathed under the pretext of the return of her
dowry.
(4) Where a foreign heir is appointed under the condition that a legacy shall
be bequeathed to a privileged person, if he should pay ten aureito the heir, an
action will be granted him to recover his legacy, if he should pay it to anyone
who has obtained possession of the estate contrary to the provisions of the
will, but not if he should pay it to the appointed heir; for it is absurd that
he should enjoy the
benefit of the estate, and that the other should sustain the burden of paying
the legacy. If, however, he should be ordered to pay it to Titius, he must not
pay it to him, but to his son.
16. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book IV.
If we suppose the case of two children, one of whom, being under the control of
his father, was passed over in his will, and the other, having been
emancipated, was appointed by him his heir, the Edict will be applicable so far
as the one who is under parental control is concerned. If both of them should
demand praetorian possession contrary to the provisions of the will, he who
remained subject to the authority of his father will not be required to pay the
legacies to the descendants and ascendants of the testator as he is entitled to
the property ab intestato.
But can it be said that the emancipated son should not pay them himself,
because he was deprived of the estate by one who would not be compelled to pay
them, if he were alone? The better opinion is that the latter should, by all
means, pay the legacies to the descendants and ascendants; hence if he did not
obtain praetorian possession contrary to the provisions of the will, it must be
said that he should be protected with reference to half of the estate, and that
he must pay the legacies to the legal representatives of the testator. I doubt
whether he will be obliged to pay all the legatees; still, for the reason that
he is in full enjoyment of the property of the testator, he should discharge
his entire duty under the will, so far as his share of the estate is concerned.
17. Ulpianus, Digest, Book XXXVI.
Where an emancipated son was passed over in a will, and his father appointed a
foreign heir, and charged him with the delivery of property which was lost
through the fraud of the said heir, after the estate has been accepted, a
praetorian action should be granted against the emancipated son, that is to
say, in favor of the person to whom the son was obliged to pay the legacy;
because the intention of the Praetor is that possession of an estate in
opposition to the terms of the will should be granted without prejudicing the
rights of other persons.
18. Africanus, Questions, Book IV.
A son and grandson were under the control of their father, were appointed his
heirs, and the testator, in addition to this, left a legacy to the grandson.
The father of the latter, another son, who had been emancipated, demanded
praetorian possession of the estate, and the grandson remained content with the
legacy. Certain authorities were of the opinion that an action to recover the
legacy should be granted to the grandson against the son alone who remained
under his father's control, because he was deprived of nothing, and the son who
was emancipated obtained the share of his son, which could not be burdened with
a legacy.
The more just decision is that an action would lie only against the emancipated
son, and, indeed, for not more than a fourth of the estate,
19. The Same, Questions, Book V.
For the reason that if all the heirs should demand praetorian possession of the
estate, half of it would be divided between the grandson and his father.
20. Marcianus, Rules, Book IV.
If the emancipated son should demand praetorian possession contrary to the
provisions of the will, it is established that the descendants and ascendants
of the testator should be protected. If, however, various donations mortis
causashould have been made to privileged persons by the testator, they must
contribute pro ratato the share of the emancipated son, just as happens in the
case of the division of an estate and legacies.
(1) Where, however, a father dies intestate, his son cannot complain of
donations mortis causa,as no contribution of legacies takes place.
21. Papinianus, Questions, Book XIII.
If the portion of an estate to which a privileged person is entitled through
the benefit of the law is rejected, the son who has received praetorian
possession will profit by that share, but he shall not pay the legacies to
anyone else than to privileged persons.
22. The Same, Opinions, Book V.
Where praetorian possession of the estate contrary to the provisions of the
will is given to an emancipated son, who has been passed over, the other son,
that is the appointed heir, who has also obtained praetorian possession, or
who, having been content with what he acquires under the Civil Law, does not
apply for praetorian possession, he will not be entitled to any preferred
legacy which may have been left to him.
23. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book HI.
Those whom the Divine Pius stated could retain either what was left to them, or
their legal shares of the estate, shall obtain nothing from slaves who have
been unable to secure their freedom on account of praetorian possession given
contrary to the provisions of the will.
24. Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book XVI.
The following question has arisen, namely: should he to whom a legacy has been
bequeathed be included among the number of children, so that it can be paid to
him by the son who has obtained praetorian possession of the estate in
opposition to the terms of the will? It was decided that he must sustain this
character at the time when the legacy begins to be payable.
25. Marcellus, Digest, Book IX.
A certain man who had emancipated his son, and retained his grandson under his
control, disinherited his son, appointed his grandson his heir to a certain
part of his estate, and passed over his other emancipated son in his will. It
can be maintained that the grandson had a right to demand praetorian possession
of the estate contrary to the provisions of the will; for praetorian possession
is distributed in proportion to the share which each one would have obtained in
case of intestacy, if the father had not been a proper heir.
(1) A testator, whose son had been adopted, appointed as his heir his grandson,
whom his son had subsequently begotten, and passed over the emancipated son.
Will the said grandson be entitled to praetorian possession of the estate under
the Edict? He ought, nevertheless, to be protected, just as ascendants and
descendants are to whom legacies must be paid by those who have obtained
praetorian possession in opposition to the terms of the will.
(2) If the testator had retained under his control one or more grandsons by his
said son, there is no doubt whatever that he or they should be protected to the
same extent, as would have been the case if the grandson by his son, or the
mother of the deceased, had been appointed heirs, for he can be compared to
them.


* 37.VI. CONCERNING THE COLLATION OF PROPERTY.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XL.
The subject of this Title manifestly is an equitable one; for the Praetor
permits emancipated children to obtain possession of the estate in opposition
to the terms of the will, and thus makes them share in the paternal estate with
those who were under the control of the testator; and he thinks, on account of
this, that those who desire to obtain the property of their father should place
all their own property in the mass of the estate.
(1) Collation affects all those to whom praetorian possession has been given.
(2) It is clear that if the Praetor should grant complete restitution to a
minor, or to anyone else entitled to it, he will also reinvest him with the
right to obtain possession of the estate contrary to the provisions of the
will, which he had failed to take advantage of, and will, in addition, restore
to him the advantage of collation.
(3) If a son, who is under the control of his father, should be appointed heir
to three-fourths of his estate, and a stranger heir to the remaining fourth,
Julianus says that an emancipated son, who has obtained praetorian possession
contrary to the provisions of the will, will only be compelled to collate his
own property in proportion to a fourth of the estate, because he deprived his
brother of only that amount. In proof of this opinion Pomponius states that an
eman-
cipated son is only obliged to collate his property with the grandsons of the
testator, who were his own sons.
(4) A father appointed his son, whom he retained under his control, and a
stranger his heirs, and passed over an emancipated son in his will. Both sons
obtained praetorian possession of his estate in opposition to the terms of the
will. It can, and not improperly, be held that the emancipated son should only
collate with his brother in proportion to the amount of the estate of which he
deprived him; for if the son who was under the father's control had been
appointed heir to less than half the property, it would seem unjust that
collation should be required of him through whom the other son obtained a
larger share of his father's estate.
(5) Therefore, there is ground for collation as often as the heir who is under
paternal authority is caused any inconvenience by the intervention of the
emancipated heir. Where, however, this is not the case, there no reason for
collation exists.
(6) Moreover, it is certainly not necessary for the emancipated son to place
his property in the mass of the estate, when he obtained it through the will of
his father and received no more than the latter left him.
(7) If he received half of the estate as a legacy, or as much as he could by
praetorian possession contrary to the provisions of the will, it must be said
that he cannot be subjected to collation.
(8) Julianus, in the same place, says that if after praetorian possession has
been obtained by the emancipated son, the son who was under paternal control
should die, the former can be compelled to make collation of his property in
such a way as to contribute as much to his nephew as he would have contributed
to his brother himself, if he had lived.
If, however, the proper heir should die before having obtained praetorian
possession of the estate, he says that the Praetor must protect his heir to the
extent of the portion to which the son who was under paternal control was
appointed heir, provided this does not exceed his share of the estate; but he
does not permit him to apply for collation in this instance, because praetorian
possession does not take effect.
(9) Again, the Praetor orders collation to be made in order that sufficient
security may be given. Pomponius says that security should be furnished by
means of sureties; but let us see whether it can also be furnished by
depositing pledges. Pomponius, in the Seventy-ninth Book on the Edict, asserts
that security for collation can be legally given either by sureties, or by
pledges; and I concur in this opinion.
(10) If the brother cannot furnish security, a curator of his share must be
appointed, with whom the money obtained from the estate should be deposited, so
that the emancipated son can receive what was paid in after he has placed his
own property in the mass of the estate. If, however, on account of his
obstinacy, an action to collect his share of the estate should be refused him,
after having given bond, he can recover his former rights.
(11) Moreover, although a bond is mentioned in the Edict of the Praetor, still
Pomponius, in the Seventy-ninth Book of the Edict, states that even collation
of the property itself can be made; for he remarks that collation can be made
either by delivering the actual property or by executing a bond. Therefore, as
he says, the emancipated heir divides his property with his brothers, and,
although he does not give security, the terms of the Edict are complied with.
We may also hold that they are complied with if he divides a portion of the
property with them, and gives security to contribute more. But as some articles
may remain concealed, he who does not furnish security will not make collation
sufficiently, even though he divides his property. If, however, it is known of
what the property of the emancipated son consists, the division of the same
will constitute a sufficient collation. If this is not known, but it is said
that certain effects have not been brought into the common mass, then bond must
be given on account of their uncertainty.
(12) But even if the emancipated son should only place in the mass of the
estate of his father as much of his own property as he will be entitled to,
aside from the collation, he is said to have contributed sufficiently.
The same rule applies where he surrenders the note of a debtor to the estate,
or transfers a tract of land, or any other property, instead of what he should
place in the common mass.
(13) If the emancipated son is obliged to make collation with two of his
brothers, and does so with one, but not with the other, whether he gives him
security, or divides his own property with him, it should be considered whether
he will lose only one-sixth of the estate, or whether he should be deprived of
the entire third of the same. I think that if he does not furnish security
through obstinacy, an action to recover the entire third should be refused him;
for he is not considered to have given security who did not provide for the
indemnification of all the parties interested. But if he is not able to furnish
it, only an action to recover the sixth should be denied him; in such a way,
however, that he can supply the defect of the bond of the collation by the
other means which we have mentioned above, or a curator may be appointed for
the preservation of his property. Some allowance should, however, be made for
one who does not fully contribute for some other reason than through obstinacy.
(14) A child who belongs to an adoptive family is compelled to make collation;
that is to say, not he himself but the person to whose authority he is subject
when required to do so, if he prefers to obtain praetorian possession contrary
to the provisions of the will. It is evident that if his adoptive father should
emancipate him before he claims praetorian possession of the estate, he will
not be compelled to make collation, and this was stated in a Rescript of the
Divine Brothers; provided, however, that the adopted son who has been
emancipated releases his brothers from collation, if this was done without
fraud.
(15) Neither castrense peculium,nor quasi castrense peculiumis the subject of
collation among brothers; for it is laid down in many Imperial Constitutions
that such property must belong exclusively to each individual.
(16) But let us see whether anyone can be compelled to place, in the common
mass of the estate, property which has been given by the father, or which is
still due and payable on account of some office. Papinianus, in the Thirteenth
Book of Questions, says that he should not be compelled to place such property
in the common mass; for it must be considered to be of a private nature, on
account of the obligations attaching to the office. If, however, it should
still be due, the matter must be settled, so that not he alone who has obtained
the office shall be liable for the debt, but that the common burden shall be
sustained by all the heirs.
(17) Where a son, having been captured by the enemy, returns after the death of
his father, even though at that time he had no property while he was in the
hands of the enemy, he will, nevertheless, be permitted to obtain praetorian
possession of the estate, and he must make collation of the property which he
would have had at the time of his father's death, if he had not been taken
prisoner. Collation must also be made by him, if it should be ascertained that
he had been ransomed from the enemy at the time of his father's death.
(18) If a legacy should be bequeathed to an emancipated son, to take effect at
the time of his father's death, he must also make collation of the legacy.
(19) If a father should be appointed an heir, and a legacy be left to him in
trust for his son, to be paid at the time of his death, must this also be the
subject of collation, since the trust is valid? The fact is that it should be
considered just as if it had been left after the death of the father, and the
son will not be compelled to place it in the mass of the estate, because, at
the time of his father's death, it did not belong to him.
(20) If an emancipated son has received a dowry from his wife, he will not be
required to place it in the mass of the estate, even if his wife should have
died before the death of the testator.
(21) Where a minor, under the age of puberty, has been arrogated, he will be
entitled to a fourth of the estate, in accordance with a Rescript of the Divine
Pius; but let us see if he claims praetorian possession of the estate of his
natural father, whether he must make collation of the said fourth. This
question is merely whether he shall relinquish his right of action for the
fourth to his heir, or not. The better opinion is that it passes to his heir,
because the action is a personal one, and therefore he must give security to
place the fourth in the mass of the estate. This, however, only takes place
where the right to obtain the fourth has been already established; for if the
adoptive father, who emancipated the heir, is still living, it must be said
that no reason exists why security should be furnished; for the
hope of collation is still premature, as he, the fourth of whose estate is due,
is still living.
(22) Where a person who should make collation of his property has a son who is
in possession of peculium, castrense,he cannot be compelled to place the
peculiumin the mass of the estate. If, however, the son who had the castrense
peculium,and the possession of whose estate was claimed under the Praetorian
Edict, should already be dead at the time, can the father be compelled to
subject the peculiumto collation? As it is not necessary for the father to
claim it, it must be said that it should be placed in the mass of the estate;
for it is neither acquired nor taken away. I further hold that if an heir has
been appointed by the son, but he does not accept the estate, and should have a
substitute, the peculiumshould be placed in the mass of the estate, for the
reason that it is neither acquired nor alienated at that time.
(23) Moreover, collation must take place where property no longer, belongs to
the emancipated son, and he has been guilty of fraud to avoid having possession
of the same. This, however, must be understood to mean that it shall only be
the subject of collation where he has relinquished possession of it
fraudulently, but if he has done something in order to avoid obtaining the
property, it will not be subject to collation; for, in this instance, he has
plotted against himself.
(24) Collation must be made of different shares as follows: for instance, where
there are two sons under the control of their father, and another who, having
been emancipated, has three hundred aureiof his own, he must contribute two
hundred to his brothers, after reserving a hundred for himself; for in this way
he will share equally with them, even though he may be one who ordinarily does
not make collation. Where, however, there are two emancipated sons, who have
three hundred aurei,and two of them are under the control of their father, it
must also be said that each one must contribute a hundred aureito each brother
who is under paternal control, and retain a hundred; but the emancipated
brothers themselves will not be liable to collation with one another.
(25) The collation of a dowry is made in the same manner, so that whoever makes
it will also include himself among those who share it.
2. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XLI.
When we say that a grandson, born after the death of his grandfather, can
obtain praetorian possession of the estate of the latter, in the name of an
emancipated son, it will be necessary to hold that his property will be subject
to collation; although it cannot be said that he who had not yet been born had
the property at the time of his grandfather's death. Therefore, he must place
the property in the mass of the estate, whether he received all of it from his
father, or merely a legacy.
(1) The property of a son is understood to mean what he has left after
deducting his debts. If, however, he owes a sum of money under a condition, it
should not immediately be deducted, but it still ought to be placed in the mass
of the estate. On the other hand, a son who is under the control of his father
should give him security that, if the condition is fulfilled, he will protect
him with reference to that portion of which he has made collation.
(2) Where property has been lost after the death of the father without the
emancipated son being to blame, the question arises, who shall suffer the loss?
Many authorities hold that property which has been lost without fraud or
negligence should not be subjected to the burden of collation; and this is
understood from the words with which the Praetor orders the property to be
subjected to collation, in accordance with the judgment of a reliable citizen;
for a reliable citizen would not decide that property is liable to collation
which a person no longer has, and which he did not lose either through fraud or
negligence.
(3) Property which, by virtue of an agreement, is due under a condition, should
be placed in the mass of the estate by the emancipated son.
The rule is different with reference to a conditional legacy; for, even if he
should be under the control of his father, and the condition should be complied
with after the death of the latter, he himself will be entitled to an action.
(4) If the emancipated son brings suit against anyone for injury committed, he
need not make it the subject of collation; for a proceeding of this kind is
brought rather for the gratification of revenge than for the recovery of money.
If, however, he has an action growing out of theft, he should make collation of
the same.
(5) Where there are three emancipated sons, and also two who are under the
control of their father, Gaius Cassius, in the Seventh Book of the Civil Law,
says that the emancipated sons should make collation of a third of their
private property; so that, although they do not contribute to one another, they
may be regarded as a single individual. They should not consider themselves ill
treated if they contribute more, and receive less; because it was in their
power not to apply for praetorian possession of the estate.
Julianus also assents to the Opinion of Cassius.
(6) If an emancipated grandson, born to an emancipated son, after the death of
both his father and his grandfather, should obtain praetorian possession of the
estates of both, each having left a proper heir, the collation to be made can
be explained as follows: for example, if he has property worth a hundred
aurei,he should contribute fifty to his uncle, and fifty to his brother, for
this ratio applies whether we take into consideration the persons themselves,
or the shares of the estate to which they are entitled.
(7) Where there are two emancipated grandsons, the issue of a deceased son, who
demand praetorian possession of the estate of their grandfather, the question
arises whether they should contribute half,
or a quarter, of their property to their uncle, by way of collation. The better
opinion is that each should contribute half of his property, for if, during the
lifetime of their grandfather, and while they were under his control, they had
received, for instance, two hundred aurei,the son would be entitled to a
hundred, and the two brothers to two hundred out of the estate of the
grandfather.
(8) Where two emancipated sons demand praetorian possession of an estate, and
one of them makes collation, and the other does not, the share of the latter
will only benefit a son who is under paternal control, and not the one who has
been emancipated, as it is on account of the one who is under paternal control
that an action is denied to the other.
(9) Where an emancipated son cannot furnish security, he must not immediately
be deprived of praetorian possession, but he may retain it until he can find
sureties, in such a way, however, that an action can be granted to those who
are under paternal control for the recovery of any property which is liable to
be damaged by delay; and they must give security to place it in the mass of the
estate, if they also are secured against loss.
3. Julianus, Digest, Book XXIII.
The Praetor does not promise possession of the property of an estate in
opposition to the terms of the will, under the condition that collation shall
be made, but he shows what must be done after possession has been given.
Otherwise, great advantage would be taken of an emancipated son, if he was not
understood to have obtained praetorian possession of the estate, unless he had
given security to make collation; for if, in the meantime, he himself should
die, he would leave nothing to his heir. Moreover, if his brother should die,
he will not be permitted to obtain praetorian possession of the estate. What
should be done under such circumstances? It must then be held that he obtained
legal possession of the estate, even before he gave security; but if he should
not give security, the result will be that the entire estate will go to the son
under paternal control.
(1) An emancipated son entered into a controversy with a minor under the age of
puberty, who declared that he was his brother, and was under the control of his
father. I ask whether the emancipated son should make collation of his property
with him. Paulus remarks on this point: &quot;I think that collation should be
made, after a bond has been required that, if the minor loses the case, he will
transfer the estate as well as the property of which collation was made.&quot;
(2) Julianus: Whenever praetorian possession is given contrary to the
provisions of the will, the emancipated sons should make collation of their
property only with those who remain under the control of their father. The
question arises how this can be done. For, if the property left by the father,
as well as that belonging to the emancipated sons, is placed in one mass, and
full shares of the same are taken, the result will be that the emancipated sons
will profit by the collation made by themselves. Therefore, let us see whether
it will
not be more convenient for the emancipated sons to receive a fourth of their
father's estate, and a third of their own property. What I mean will become
more plain by an example.
Let us suppose that a father left four hundred aurei,and two sons under his
control, and two have been emancipated. Of these one will have a hundred and
the other sixty aureiout of his estate; the one who will be entitled to a
hundred will obtain in all a hundred and thirty-three and a third; and he who
contributed sixty will obtain a hundred and twenty, so that the result will be
that those only who remained under the control of their father will obtain the
benefit of the collation.
(3)Emancipated sons are ordered to place their property in collation with those
who are under the control of their father.
(4) Wherefore, as he who is under the control of his father receives the dowry
of his wife as a preferred legacy, so, also, can an emancipated son retain that
of his wife as a preferred legacy.
(5) Where an emancipated son, who was passed over in a will, gives security
with reference to the collation of his property, while he is deliberating
whether he will demand praetorian possession of the estate or not, and he does
not do so, and his brother brings suit against him on the stipulation, he will
be secure under the will.
If, however, he has deposited money by way of collation, he can recover it by
an action; for, after he has declined to apply for praetorian possession, there
will be no reason for the money to remain in
the hands of the heir.
(6) A man who had two sons under his control, and also a grandson who was the
son of one of them, emancipated the one by whom he had the grandson; and, after
having been emancipated, the son had another son whom his grandfather adopted
in his stead; and then the grandfather died, either intestate, or after making
a will in which his emancipated son was passed over.
The question arose, what would the rule be with reference to praetorian
possession, and what ought to be done with respect to collation? The answer was
that, so far as the property was concerned, three parts should be made of it,
one of which would belong to the son who remained under paternal control, the
second to the grandson who was adopted instead of the son, and the third to the
emancipated son and the grandson who remained under paternal control; so that
the father would be liable to collation only with the one who had obtained
praetorian possession of the estate.
4. Africanus, Questions, Book IV.
An emancipated son is not obliged to place in collation the dowry which he gave
to his daughter, because it is not understood to be included in the property of
the father from whom it was derived, as it is in that of the mother.
5. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXIX.
Where anyone has a son who is his own master, and by him a grandson who is
under his control, it must be said that if the grand-
son receives praetorian possession of the estate of his emancipated father, he
must give security to place his property in collation, and he is like one who
has adopted the son of another; for the Divine Brothers stated in a Rescript
that the grandfather was compelled to place his property in the mass of the
estate. It is true that the following is added in the same Rescript:
&quot;Unless the grandfather does not desire to obtain any benefit from his
property, and is ready to release his grandson from his authority, so that all
the benefit of praetorian possession of the estate may be enjoyed by him after
his emancipation.&quot; Hence a daughter, who was born after the emancipation
of her father, and who became his heir, cannot justly complain of being
excluded from the benefit of the collation by what has been done; as after her
grandfather dies, she can, along with her brother, succeed to the estate. This
reason cannot be advanced in the case of an adoptive father, and, still we
adopt the same rule with reference to him, if he emancipated the son without
committing any fraud.
(1) The stipulation referring to collation takes effect when the person called
upon does not act within the time when he ought to have placed his property in
the mass of the estate; especially as it is inserted in the Edict of the
Praetor that collation should be made in accordance with the judgment of a good
citizen.
(2) Therefore, if collation does not take place in accordance with the terms
prescribed, or if it is only partially carried out, the stipulation will become
operative.
(3) And, whether the son does make collation or not, according to the terms of
the stipulation, or whether he avoids doing it by means of some fraudulent act,
judgment shall be rendered against him for a sum equal to the value of the
property.
6. Celsius, Digest, Book X.
The question arises whether the dowry given by a paternal grandfather should be
returned to the father after the death of the grandfather, the woman having
died during marriage. The equity of the case seems to be that what my father
has given to my daughter on my account is just the same as if I had given it
myself, for the duty of a grandfather towards his granddaughter depends upon
the affection which a father entertains toward a son, and because the father
should endow his daughter, so a grandfather should endow his granddaughter for
the sake of his son.
But what if the son was disinherited by his father? I hold that it would not be
absurd for the same rule to be maintained in the case of a disinherited son. I
think that it is not an improper opinion that the son should be entitled to
what was bestowed out of his father's estate on his account.
7. The Same, Digest, Book XIII.
Where grandsons succeed to the place of sons, only one share should be
contributed to them by way of collation, so that they may have one share of the
estate under praetorian possession. They them-
selves, however, must place their property in the mass of the estate, just as
if all of them only constituted one person.
8. Papinianus, Questions, Book HI.
The Praetor sometimes does not exclude one who is irresolute, or reject him
after he has changed his mind. Therefore, certain authorities have held that an
emancipated son who refused to give security with reference to placing his
property in the mass of the estate ought afterwards to be heard, if, after
having furnished security, he should desire to take advantage of the benefit of
the praetorian possession of the estate; although it might be said that he
seemed to have rejected possession who was unwilling to observe the formalities
by which it
could be acquired.
The former opinion, however, is the more equitable one, especially where a
dispute arises among brothers with reference to their father's estate; and I
think that the emancipated son should be permitted to obtain possession, if, in
the time prescribed for doing so, he offers to give security; for it will be
more difficult to excuse voluntary delay in giving security after the lapse of
a year, within which time praetorian possession of an estate can be granted.
9. The Same, Opinions, Book V.
An emancipated son obtained praetorian possession of the estate of his
intestate father. The grandson by the said son, who remained in the family,
will be entitled to half of the estate, together with the benefit of collation.
If the same grandson should afterwards obtain praetorian possession of the
estate of his intestate father, he will be obliged to place his property in the
mass of the estate by way of collation with his brother,'who was born after the
emancipation of his father.
.10. Scsevola, Questions, Book V.
If a son under the control of his father, after having been appointed his heir,
enters upon his estate, and an emancipated son demands praetorian possession of
the same contrary to the provisions of the will, and he himself does not do so,
no contribution by way of collation should be made for his benefit; and it is
so stated in the
Edict.
I think, however, that just as he can legally retain the estate in proportion
to his share, because he can demand praetorian possession of it, so, also, he
certainly should contribute by way of collation for the benefit of his brother,
as the latter suffers wrong through his obtaining praetorian possession.
11. Paulus, Opinions, Book XI.
Paulus gives it as his opinion that an emancipated son is not obliged to make
collation of such property as should be transferred to him after the death of
his father, for the benefit of his brother who was left under paternal control,
even if he obtained the said property
before he was entitled to it; as he is held to have had possession of the same
after the death of his father, not so much by virtue of the donation, as on
account of the debt.
12. The Same, On the Edict, Book XLL
Where anyone leaves a wife who is pregnant, and she obtains praetorian
possession in the name of her unborn child, collation is suspended for a time;
for before the child was born it could not be said to have been under the
control of the deceased; but after it is born, collation must be made.


* 37.VII. CONCERNING COLLATION OF THE DOWRY.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XL.
Although the Praetor only compels a daughter to make collation of her dowry
where she demands possession of the estate under the Edict; still if she does
not do so she should make collation, provided she meddles with the estate of
her father. This was stated by the Divine Pius in a Rescript addressed to
Ulpius Adrian; for, according to it, a woman who does not demand praetorian
possession of an estate can be compelled to contribute her dowry in collation
by means of an action in partition brought by her co-heirs.
(1) Where a dowry has been provided for under an agreement, and the woman
herself has stipulated for it, or someone has done so who has charge of her
business, she can also be compelled to place it in the mass of the estate.
If, however, the stipulation was solicited by another, it must be said that
collation need not be made, and where the dowry was merely promised, collation
of the same ought to take place.
(2) Where there is a grandson, as well as a granddaughter by the same son, and
the granddaughter was endowed, and there was another son who was not the father
of the said children, the granddaughter must place her dowry in collation for
the benefit of her brother alone. Moreover, if the granddaughter should be
emancipated, she must place her dowry and her property in the mass of the
estate for the benefit of her brother alone, and not for that of her uncle.
(3) Where, however, there is only a granddaughter, and no grandson by the same
father, then collation must be made for the benefit of the paternal uncle, as
well as for that of cousins of either sex.
(4) Where there are two granddaughters by different sons, they contribute in
collation reciprocally, and for the benefit of their uncle; if they have the
same father, they only contribute reciprocally.
(5) Where a dowry is placed in the mass of an estate, a deduction of necessary
expenses, but of no others, is made.
(6) If a divorce has taken place, and the husband is insolvent, the wife is not
compelled to account for her entire dowry, but only as much of it as can come
into her hands; that is, as much as her husband is able to pay.
(7) If, however, the father or a stranger has promised a dowry under a
condition, a bond must be given; and then the woman can make collation of her
dowry as soon as she is endowed.
(8) A daughter who is the heir at law of her father must also contribute her
dowry, and the result will be that where the dowry is promised she will release
her brother from half the obligation; for it is more just that she should be
endowed out of her own property.
(9) Where an emancipated son, who has obtained praetorian possession of the
estate in opposition to the terms of the will, has a daughter who has been
endowed by someone else, he will not be obliged to place her dowry in the mass
of the estate, because it does not constitute any part of his property.
2. Gams, On the Provincial Edict, Book XIV.
A daughter who has been given in adoption and appointed heir must, in the same
manner as an emancipated daughter, contribute for collation her private
property, as well as the dowry which she may have received. If her adoptive
father should still be living, it will be necessary for him to make the
collation.
3. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book IV.
If a daughter should be appointed heir, she will not be required' to place her
dowry in the mass of the estate. Therefore, if another child has taken
advantage of the Edict, she also must obtain possession of the estate in
opposition to the terms of the will, for since she commits no wrong against her
brother, she need not contribute her dowry, as what she obtained by the will is
changed into what she would obtain through praetorian possession of the estate,
contrary to its provisions.
It is clear that, if she was appointed heir to a smaller portion of the estate
than her legal share, and she obtained something else through the praetorian
possession, as her share is increased thereby, she will be obliged to
contribute for collation, unless she remains content with the share which was
left her. For then it must be held that she will not be obliged to perform the
duty of collation, as she acquired the property by the will of her father.
4. Pomponius, On Quintus Mucius, Book HI.
Where a father promised a dowry for his daughter whom he afterwards
disinherited, or if he bequeathed her a legacy after she had been emancipated,
and passed her over in his will, she will be entitled to the dowry as a
preferred legacy, as well as to the legacy.
5. Papinianus, Opinions, Book V.
An emancipated son, who could have obtained praetorian possession contrary to
the provisions of the will, acquired possession of the estate of his father,
under the Edict, on the ground of intestacy. A daughter also, who remained
under parental control, having been appointed heir along with a brother of the
same family, repeated the
error of her emancipated brother, and obtained possession under the Edict on
the ground of intestacy. She will not be obliged to contribute her dowry by way
of collation for the benefit of her brother, who was appointed heir; as the
praetorian possession which she claimed was of no force or effect, and she will
retain her entire share of the estate under the will of her father; that is to
say, each of the three children will have a third, and it will be presumed that
the praetorian possession of the estate contrary to the provisions of the will,
designated unde liberi,was demanded.
(1) A daughter, who was obliged to contribute her dowry after the dissolution
of her marriage, delayed doing so. She will be obliged to pay interest on the
dowry in accordance with the judgment of a good citizen, since her emancipated
brother must also place his income in collation, and she has received the
income of her share.
6. The Same, Opinions, Book VI.
Afather appointed his emancipated son his heir, and disinherited his daughter,
who, having brought an action to declare the will inofficious, recovered half
of the estate. I gave it as my opinion that her brother should not be compelled
to place his own property in the mass of the estate; for it has been
established that under such circumstances even bequests of freedom are valid.
7. Paulus, Opinions, Book XL
Nor shall she contribute her dowry for the benefit of her brothers, as the
latter are heirs under a different right than hers.
8. Papinians, Opinions, Book XL
A father gave his daughter, at the time of her marriage, certain property in
addition to her dowry, retained her under his control, and appointed her co-
heir with her brothers, subject to the condition that she would contribute her
dowry, and any other property which he had given her when she was married, by
way of collation. As the daughter did not accept the estate, it was held that
she could interpose an exception, on the ground of bad faith, against her
brothers who brought an action to recover the property not included in the
dowry, for the reason that her father intended that she should have one or the
other of these.
9. Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book VI.
The question was raised whether a daughter who, along with her brothers, was a
proper heir of her father and, being content with her dowry, refused to accept
the estate, could be compelled to place it in collation. The Divine Marcus
stated in a Rescript that, if she did not accept her father's estate, she could
not be forced to do so. Therefore, the dowry which was given will not only
remain in the hands of the husband, but also, if it has been promised it can be
collected from her brothers, and is considered a debt, as it is no longer
included in the estate of the father.


* 37.VIII. CONCERNING THE CONTRIBUTION TO BE MADE BETWEEN AN EMANCIPATED SON AND HIS CHILDREN.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XL.
Where anyone of those to whom the Praetor promises the possession of an estate
is not under paternal control at the time of the death of his father, and he
has children forming part of the family of the testator, and the estate will
belong to them in their own right, and they have not been disinherited,
possession of his share of the estate which would have belonged to him if he
had remained under the control of his father is given him by the Praetor, in
such a way that his share will be divided into two parts, one of which will
belong to him, and the other to his children, and he will be compelled to place
his own property in collation for their benefit alone.
(1) This Section of the Edict is perfectly equitable, as it provides that the
emancipated son cannot alone obtain the estate, and thereby exclude the
grandsons remaining under paternal control, and the grandsons cannot interfere
with their father on the ground that they themselves were under the control of
the testator.
(2) The case where a son is given in adoption, and a grandson, who is under the
control of his natural grandfather, is joined with him in the succession, is
also referred to in this Section of the Edict. Moreover, the grandson is joined
with his emancipated father, whether his father was passed over, or was
appointed an heir.
There is this difference, however, between a son given in adoption and one who
is emancipated, namely: the grandson is not joined with the one given in
adoption unless he has been appointed an heir, and a third part is responsible
for the Edict taking effect; but he is joined with an emancipated son, whether
the latter was appointed an heir or passed over in the will.
(3) Julianus says that, where a son under paternal control is appointed an heir
to two-thirds of the estate, and an emancipated son to one-third, if the
grandson who has been passed over should obtain praetorian possession contrary
to the provisions of the will, he will take from his uncle one-sixth, and from
his father one-twelfth of the estate.
(4) If the emancipated father should be disinherited, and his children, the
grandsons of the testator under paternal control, should be passed over, the
said grandsons will be permitted to obtain praetorian possession; for it is
absurd that, as they were joined with their father, and he was passed over in
the will, they should not be admitted to praetorian possession, when their
father has either been appointed an heir, or disinherited.
(5) If the uncle of the said grandchildren, who was under parental control, was
passed over in the will, and their father should be disinherited, the said
grandsons must be permitted to obtain praetorian possession, as their father,
having been disinherited, is considered as dead.
(6) Scsevola says that if a father, who remains under paternal control, is
either disinherited or appointed an heir, a son born to him, whether he remains
subject to paternal authority or has been emancipated, cannot, and should not
be called to the succession of his grandfather; for the Praetor only provides
for a grandson as long as he is retained under the control of the testator, his
father having been emancipated. Therefore, for this Section of the Edict to be
applicable, children must remain in the family, that is to say, that family the
possession of whose estate is demanded. If, however, a posthumous child, having
been conceived before his emancipation, should be born to the emancipated son,
the same rule must be held to apply.
(7) The Praetor does not call all the descendants to the succession
indiscriminately, but according to their several degrees; that is to say, first
the direct heirs, for instance, the grandsons, if there are any, and if there
are none, those of a lower degree; but we must not mix them. It is clear that
if a grandson is descended from an emancipated son, and a great-grandson from
another grandson, it must be said that both of them should be joined, for both
have succeeded to the place of direct heirs.
(8) If a grandson should return under the law of postliminium,it must be held
that he should be joined with his emancipated father.
(9) If a father should emancipate one of his two sons, both of whom he has
under his control, and adopt a grandson by one of them, instead of his son,
and, having passed over his emancipated son in his will, should die, Julianus
says that relief must be granted the grandson who was adopted instead of the
son, so that, in the capacity of son, he will have that share of the estate to
which a stranger would have been entitled if he had been adopted by the
testator. He says that the result will be that the son under paternal control
will be entitled to a third part of the estate; the grandson adopted instead of
the son will be entitled to another third; and the emancipated son will divide
the remaining third with the other grandson remaining under the control of the
testator.
(10) It makes no difference to what portion of the estate the grandson may be
entitled, or even if it is very small; for in case it is insignificant, we
still hold that there will be ground for the application of this Section of the
Edict.
(11) The estate is divided between the son and his children so that he will
obtain one-half, and they the other. Hence, if you suppose that there is only
one son emancipated, and two grandsons remaining under paternal control, and
that there are no other descendants besides these, the emancipated son will be
entitled to half of the estate, and the two grandsons to the other half, after
dividing it into fourths.
If there should happen to be another son from whom no grandsons have ascended,
he will be entitled to half the estate, and the other son, along with his sons,
to the other half, so that he himself will have a fourth of the estate, and the
other fourth will be divided among his children. Where, however, both sons have
been emancipated, and both of them have issue, the result will be that each
must divide half of the
estate with his children, so that they themselves will each have a fourth, and
their children respectively the remaining fourth.
If one of them has two sons, and the other three, one-fourth will be divided
among the two, and the other among the three children.
(12) Where one of the grandchildren refuses to accept his share of the estate,
the result will be that his share will not belong to his father, but preferably
to his brother. If, however, all the grandchildren refuse to accept their
shares, none of them will accrue to the uncle, but to the father alone. If,
however, their father should refuse them, then they will accrue to their uncle.
(13) If an emancipated son has no children under the control of their
grandfather, the testator must place his property in collation for the benefit
of his brothers. If there are any grandchildren, the Praetor wishes him to make
collation only for the benefit of those of his children who are under the
control of their grandfather. This is reasonable, because by obtaining
praetorian possession of the estate he prejudices only the rights of his
children.
(14) Now let us see how much he must contribute for their benefit. And, indeed,
when the emancipated son makes collation for the benefit of his brothers, does
he always deduct his own share for himself ? And, in the above-mentioned
instance, shall he deduct his entire share, or must only half of his own
private property be placed in the mass of the estate, as he only is entitled to
half of the share of what is obtained by praetorian possession? I think that he
should contribute only half of his own private property for their benefit; but
even if one son has been emancipated, and the other remains under the control
of the testator, the emancipated son will only contribute one share for the
benefit of the two grandsons, and one-third for the benefit of the uncle of
those retained under the power of the testator, and he himself will be entitled
to the other third. For whatever is placed in collation for the grandsons by
the emancipated uncle, they themselves will not place in collation for the
benefit of their own father; for they do not obtain this from the estate of
their grandfather, but it is done on account of property which they have
subsequently received.
(15) Hence, the result will be that if the emancipated father has a hundred
aureiamong his property, he will retain fifty for himself, and give the
remaining fifty in collation to all the grandchildren, that is to say, to his
own children; or if he has one grandson, and two great-grandsons by another
grandson, he must divide the fifty aureiso that the grandson may have twenty-
five, and the great-grandsons twenty-five together; for both are entitled to
only one share in the praetorian possession of the estate.
(16) Scsevola ingeniously discusses the following question, namely: where there
is one son under the control of his father, and another is emancipated, and a
grandson of a deceased son under the control of the testator, and another
grandson who has been emancipated, how much should the emancipated uncle place
in collation for the benefit of his nephews, and how much for that of his
brother? He says it can be held that the property ought to be divided into
three shares, one of which
he shall retain, one shall be placed in collation for the benefit of his
brother, and one for that of his nephews, although the latter, if they share
with their father in the estate of their grandfather, will have less than their
uncle. This opinion is correct.
(17) Even if there are two grandsons by the same son, and they are emancipated,
and a great-grandson by one of them was under the control of the deceased, one
grandson will have one share of the estate and the other grandson, together
with his son, will be entitled to the other.
(18) If there is a grandson, and two great-grandsons by another grandson who is
dead, and one of the said great-grandsons has been emancipated, he will only
make collation for the benefit of his brother, or if he has no brother, for the
benefit of his uncle, and not for that of his great uncle.
2. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XLL
In this section of the Edict the Praetor makes no provision with reference to
legacies which the grandson shall pay to privileged persons. What has
previously been said on this point is applicable here, for it is absurd that
the father of the grandson should be obliged to pay such legacies, and that the
grandson should have more, where, under the same circumstances, he is called to
the same share under the Praetorian Law.
3. Marcellus, Digest, Book IX.
A father who had two sons emancipated one of them, and retained his grandson by
the latter under his control. The emancipated son himself had a son, who was
disinherited by his father. I ask, if his brother and the emancipated son
himself should be passed over in the will, and the grandsons of the emancipated
son be appointed by the grandfather heirs to his estate, what would be the
rule, in case of praetorian possession, and what difference would it make if we
suppose that the emancipated son, from whom the grandsons were descended,
should also be passed over in the will? I answered that if the testator should
have emancipated his son, and retained the grandson by the latter under his
control, and the emancipated son should have a son, and both grandsons should
be appointed heirs, and their father be disinherited, and the other son passed
over, the latter alone could demand praetorian possession in opposition to the
terms of the will; for the disinherited son is an impediment in the way of his
own children born after emancipation.
Praetorian possession should, however, be granted to the grandson remaining
under the control of his grandfather; as, if his father, who had been
emancipated, should be passed over in the will, he can obtain praetorian
possession of the estate under that Section of the Edict which was introduced
by Julianus; that is to say, under the new clause. Nor would he be in worse
condition because his father was disinherited, and he must be shown the same
consideration if he himself had been passed over in the will. The condition of
his brother, however, who was born after emancipation, is different; for the
estate must be preserved for his benefit, so far as his entire share is
concerned, as the Emperor
Antoninus stated in a Rescript with reference to a granddaughter, the child of
the daughter of the testator.
4. Modestinus, Pandects, Book XVI.
A certain man, having emancipated his son, retained the children of the latter
under his control. The emancipated son, having had children, afterwards died.
It was decided that those grandchildren who remained under the control of their
grandfather, were, by virtue of a special decree, entitled to praetorian
possession of the estate of the latter, together with those who were born after
the emancipation, with the exception that, if the grandfather desired to obtain
the estate of his son, by means of his grandchildren, he could place his
property in collation, or he could emancipate them, in order that they might
obtain for themselves the benefit of their father's estate. This the Divine
Marcus stated in a Rescript.
5. The Same, Differences, Book VI.
If the disinherited grandson should become the heir of him whom the grandfather
appointed his heir, and then his emancipated father, who had been passed over
in the will, should obtain praetorian possession of the estate of his father
contrary to the provisions of the will, the grandson could not be joined with
his father, but would be excluded as a stranger, because he is not the heir of
his grandfather in his own right.
6. Scsevola, Questions, Book V.
Where anyone who has a son under his control adopts a stranger in the place of
his grandson, just as if he had been born to his son, and afterwards
emancipated his son, the grandson will not be joined with the emancipated son
in the praetorian possession, because he has ceased to be included among the
children of the latter.
7. Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book XVI.
If a testator, after the emancipation of his son, has a grandson by the latter,
his share of the estate of his grandfather must be preserved for him. Let us,
however, see how much this will amount to. For suppose that the grandson was
appointed co-heir with his uncle, and that the father of the said grandson,
having been passed over in the will, should obtain praetorian possession
contrary to the testamentary provisions, in accordance with the terms of the
Praetorian Edict, the property of the estate would be divided into two parts.
Now, however, after the Constitution of the Divine Pius has been promulgated,
must that to which the grandson is entitled be his entire share, or merely a
fourth? For if, after his birth, he had been under the control of his
grandfather, he will be joined with his father, and both together will be
entitled to half of the estate.
Let us suppose that there was another grandson, descended from the same son,
and belonging to the family of the grandfather, the two grandsons together
would be entitled to a fourth of the estate, if their
father had obtained praetorian possession in opposition to the terms of the
will, and they had been under the control of their grandfather. Must he who had
not been retained in the family now be permitted to receive an eighth of the
estate? And who must be deprived of his share to obtain what is given him ?
Would it be taken only from his father, or from his uncle as well? I think it
would only be taken from his uncle, for he would be compelled to pay the legacy
bequeathed to the said grandson.


* 37.IX. CONCERNING THE PLACING OF AN UNBORN CHILD IN POSSESSION OF AN ESTATE, AND HIS CURATOR.

1. Ulpiamis, On the Edict, Book XLI.
The Prastor not only provides for the welfare of children who are already born,
but also does not neglect those who are as yet unborn; for he protects their
interests in one of the Sections of the Edict by placing an unborn child in
possession of an estate instead of praetorian possession contrary to the terms
of the will.
(1) It is absolutely necessary that the woman should be pregnant, and it is not
sufficient for her to merely allege that she is in this condition. Therefore,
such a grant of the possession of an estate is not valid, unless she was
actually pregnant at the time of the death of the testator, on account of which
she demands to be placed in possession.
(2) An unborn child is placed in possession of an estate whenever it is not
disinherited, and where it will afterwards be included among the proper heirs.
When, however, it is uncertain whether this will be the case, we sometimes
place the unborn child in possession, if it may, under certain circumstances,
become a proper heir; as it is sometimes more equitable for unnecessary
expenses to be incurred than for maintenance to be refused to one who may
become the owner of the estate.
(3) Therefore, if disinheritance is expressed in the following terms, &quot;If
a son should be born to me, let him be disinherited,&quot; because a daughter
may be born, or several sons, or a son and a daughter, and in either of these
cases the unborn child will be placed in possession of the estate; for, while
it is still uncertain what the birth will be, it is better for the child that
has been disinherited to be supported than for one which may not be
disinherited to perish with hunger, and any diminution of the estate made on
this account ought to be ratified, even though the child who was excluded from
the succession should be born.
(4) The same rule will apply if the woman who was in possession of the estate
should have a miscarriage.
(5) If, however, the posthumous child was disinherited under a condition while
the condition is pending, we adopt the opinion of Pedius, who held that the
unborn child should be placed in possession of the estate; because, in case of
uncertainty, it is always better for it to be supported.
(6) Where an unborn child is disinherited in the first place, and passed over
as a substitute, Marcellus denies that it can be placed in possession while the
appointed heirs are living, for the reason that it was disinherited; which is
true.
(7) On the other hand, if an unborn child is passed over, as one of the
appointed heirs, and is disinherited as a substitute, it should be placed in
possession of the estate while the appointed heirs are living. If, however,
they are not living, he says that this should not be done, because the estate
passes to the degree in which the child was disinherited.
(8) Where a son has been captured by the enemy, and his wife is pregnant, she
should be placed in possession of the estate of her father-in-law, for a case
might occur where the child, after its birth, may become a direct heir; as, for
instance, if its father should die in the hands of the enemy.
(9) If, however, anyone should disinherit an unborn child as follows, &quot;If
a child should be born to me within three months after my death, let it be
disinherited,&quot; or &quot;After three months,&quot; the unborn child is
placed in possession because there is a chance that it may become a direct
heir. In cases of this kind, the Praetor should always be very indulgent, in
order that the child whose birth is expected may not die before it is born.
(10) Again, the Praetor never mentions the name of the wife, because it may
happen that the woman who alleges that she is pregnant by her husband may not
have been his wife at the time of his death.
(11) The unborn child of an emancipated son also may obtain possession of his
estate. Therefore, in the Twenty-seventh Book of the Digest, the question is
asked, if a son who was emancipated while his wife was pregnant, should
afterwards die, and his father should also die, whether the unborn child can be
placed in possession of the estate of his emancipated father. And he very
correctly says that there is no reason why the unborn child whom the Edict
permits to obtain possession should be excluded from it; for it is perfectly
just to provide for the child who, after its birth, will be entitled to
possession of the estate. If its grandfather should still be living, we also
permit the unborn child to obtain possession of the estate of its father.
(12) If a son who is given in adoption should die, leaving his wife pregnant,
and then the adoptive father should die, the unborn child will be placed in
possession of the estate of his adoptive father. Let us, however, see whether
he should also be placed in possession, of the estate of the father who gave
his son in adoption. If this posthumous grandson is appointed heir of his
natural grandfather, he will be placed in possession of his estate, because if
there was no other child at the time of his birth, praetorian possession in
accordance with the provisions of the will could be given him; or if there were
other children, who had been passed over, he could, also, along with them
obtain praetorian possession in opposition to the terms of the will.
(13) If a father should emancipate his son while his daughter-in-law is
pregnant, the unborn child ought not to absolutely be excluded;
for, after it has been born, it can be joined with the father under the new
clause of the Edict. And, generally speaking, in those cases where a child,
after its birth, can be joined with its father in the succession, it should be
permitted to obtain possession before it is born.
(14) Where the woman who desires to be placed in possession of an estate is not
the wife of the testator, nor his daughter-in-law, nor has ever sustained such
a relation to him, or it is asserted that she is not pregnant by him, the
prsetor will render a decree, as under the Car-bonian Edict. This the Divine
Hadrian stated in a Rescript addressed to the Praetor, Claudius Proculus,
directing him to assume summary jurisdiction of the case; and if it was evident
that the woman who desired to be placed in possession of the estate in the name
of her unborn child had been guilty of fraud, he must not decide in her favor.
If, however, any doubt should exist, he was ordered to be careful not to cause
any injury to the unborn child, but to place it in possession of the estate.
Hence, it appears that, unless the woman was evidently guilty of deceit, she
could demand a decision of the Praetor; and in case there should be any
reasonable doubt as to whether she was pregnant by her husband, she must be
protected by a decree, in order that the rights of the unborn child might not
be prejudiced.
The same rule is applicable where a controversy arises with reference to the
social status of the woman.
(15) Generally speaking, we do not doubt that the Prsetor should come to the
relief of an unborn child in all those instances in which he is accustomed to
grant possession under the Carbonian Decree where the child is already born;
and this is done the more readily because the case of an unborn child is
treated with greater indulgence than that of one who is already born; for this
preference is conceded to the former in order that it may be brought into the
world. A child is favored after it is born in order that it may be reared in
the family, and an unborn child must be supported, because if he is not the son
of his alleged father he will still be born to the State.
(16) If anyone, after having rendered his first wife pregnant, marries a
second, and also renders her pregnant, and then dies, the Edict will suffice
for both cases, provided no one disputes the right of either of the women, or
accuses either of fraud.
(17) Moreover, whenever an unborn child is placed in possession of an estate,
the mother usually asks that a curator be appointed for it, as well as for the
estate. If, however, a curator is only appointed for the child, the creditors
of the estate will be permitted to take charge of the property for safe
keeping; but if a curator is appointed, not only for the child, but also for
the estate, the creditors may rest secure, as the curator must assume the
responsibility. Hence a curator should be appointed for the estate after an
examination as to its solvency; and the creditors, or any other person
interested in it, must see that the curator is solvent, and is not one who will
be entitled to the succession, in case the child should not be born.
(18) The present practice is to appoint the same curator for both the property
and the child. If, however, creditors, or anyone who has
hopes of succeeding to the estate appears, the appointment should be made more
carefully and circumspectly, and several curators should be appointed, if this
is requested.
(19) Moreover, a woman who is placed in possession of an estate should take
from the property only those things without which her child cannot be either
nourished or born; and it is for this purpose that a curator ought to be
appointed who will furnish food, drink, clothing, and lodging to the woman, in
proportion to the means and rank of the deceased, and that of the woman.
(20) The deduction required for these expenses should be first made from the
ready money belonging to the estate, and, if there is none, from the property
which causes the greatest expense to the estate rather than from that which
increases it by its income.
(21) Again, if there is any danger that some of the property may be obtained by
usucaption, or debtors of the estate be released from liability by lapse of
time, the curator must also attend to these matters.
(22) Therefore he must discharge the duties of his office just as the curators
and guardians of wards are accustomed to do.
(23) A curator is selected from among those who have been appointed guardians
pf a posthumous child; or from the near relatives and connections; or from the
substitutes; or from the friends or creditors of the deceased. A person who is
considered solvent should be chosen; and if there is any question as to the
personal character of those above mentioned, an honorable man must be selected.
(24) If no curator should yet be appointed (for the reason that frequently
application is not made for one, or it is made too late, or the appointment is
made too late), Servius says that the testamentary heir or the substitute need
not seal up the property, but shall make an inventory of it, and assign to the
woman what she may require.
(25) He also says that a custodian ought to be appointed by the heir to take
care of such property as cannot otherwise be preserved; as for instance, flocks
or grain, and vintages, where the crops have not been gathered. If any
controversy should arise as to how much should be taken from the estate, an
arbiter must be appointed.
(26) I think that all this is disposed of when a curator has been appointed;
the bills of sale and the inventory of the estate should, however, be signed by
him.
(27) The unborn child should remain in possession until it comes into the
world; or the mother has a miscarriage; or until it is certain that she is not
pregnant.
(28) If she, being well aware that she was not pregnant, should use part of the
estate, Labeo says that it should be taken out of her property.
2. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XLI.
If she should have a child that has been excluded from the estate, she must
withdraw.
3. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of La/w, Book III.
Where any expense has been incurred by her in good faith, it should not be
recovered from her.
4. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XL1.
A lodging, also, must be rented for the woman, if the deceased did not have a
house.
(1) The slaves of the woman likewise must be provided with subsistencewhere
they are necessary for her servicein accordance with her social rank.
5. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XIV.
The curator of the unborn child should also provide the woman with maintenance;
for it makes no difference whether she has a dowry by means of which she can
support herself, or not, because what is furnished her is considered to have
been given for her unborn child.
(1) Where a curator is appointed for an unborn child, he should take care to
pay the debts of the estate, especially those whose non-payment involve
pecuniary penalties, or where valuable pledges have been deposited as security.
6. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XLI.
Where a posthumous heir is appointed who is a stranger, the unborn child will
not be placed in possession of the estate unless its mother cannot support
herself otherwise; for we hold that maintenance should not be denied to one
who, after his birth, will become the possessor of the estate.
7. The Same, On the Edict, Book XLI.
Whenever anyone becomes an heir ab intestato,in this instance also, an unborn
child is permitted to obtain possession of the estate; that is to say, if it is
such a child that when it is born, it will be entitled to praetorian
possession; and in all the Sections of the Edict an unborn child is considered
as a survivor.
(1) Sometimes, but not indiscriminately, an unborn child should not be placed
in possession of the estate; but only after proper cause is shown, where anyone
contests its right. This, however, merely has reference to an unborn child who,
with other children of the deceased, can obtain possession. But if it should be
placed in possession as the next of kin, or under any other Section of the
Edict, it must be said that an investigation will not be necessary; for it is
not just that the child should be supported by the property of another until it
arrives at puberty, because the settlement of the controversy should be
deferred until that time.
It is established that all controversies relating to the condition of children
must be postponed until they arrive at puberty; not that the child can remain
in possession during the existence of the disputes, but that the delay should
be without possession.
(2) Moreover, although the Praetor can place the unborn child in possession of
the estate, along with those to whom he has already granted it; still, the
unborn child alone may be permitted to hold possession of the property.
8. Paulus, On Adultery, Book I.
Where a woman is placed in possession of an estate in the name of her unborn
child, the Divine Hadrian stated in a Rescript addressed to Calpurnius Flaccus
that an accusation of adultery should be postponed, in order that no wrong may
be done to the child.
9. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XV.
Where an unborn child is placed in possession of an estate, what is taken from
the estate for its support should be deducted as a debt.
10. Paulus, Questions, Book VII.
A posthumous child, no matter when it may be born, provided it was conceived at
the time of the death of the testator, can obtain praetorian possession of the
estate, for the Praetor places it in possession under all the Sections of the
Edict by which it may obtain it, but it will not be placed in possession, if,
after its birth, it is not entitled to it.


* 37.X. CONCERNING THE CAKBONIAN EDICT.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XLI.

If a dispute should arise as to whether a child under the age of puberty should
be included among the descendants of the deceased, possession will be given it
after proper cause is shown, just as if no controversy had arisen with
reference to the matter; and, after investigation has taken place, the decision
will be postponed until the time that the child arrives at puberty.
(1) If security for the minor is not given to him who raises the question, the
Praetor orders him to be placed in possession of the estate along with the
minor.
(2) Not only males, but also females descendants from males, are entitled to
the benefit of the Carbonian Edict.
(3) In general, we say that those are entitled to the benefit of the Carbonian
Edict who can obtain praetorian possession of an estate contrary to the
provisions of the will; but those are not entitled to it who are excluded from
obtaining such possession.
(4) If a child is made the subject of a controversy of this kind, namely: where
it is denied that he should be included among the descendants of the deceased,
and the question was raised not by a stranger, but by his own father; as, for
instance, where a grandson alleges that his father was emancipated, and that he
was retained under the control of his grandfather, and asks to be joined with
his father, should the decision in this case be postponed ? The better opinion
is that
it should be; for it makes very little difference who raises the controversy,
as even if the testator should deny that he was included among his descendants,
and he, nevertheless, did not disinherit him, there will be ground for the
application of the Carbonian Edict.
(5) If anyone should deny not only that the child has a right to be included
among the descendants of the testator, and should even allege that he is a
slave, for instance, born of a female slave, Julianus says that there is ground
for the application of the Carbonian Edict, which the Divine Pius also stated
in a Rescript. For great care should be exercised with reference to those who
are threatened with a serious wrong; as, if it were otherwise, any extremely
bold man could inflict injury upon a minor under the age of puberty by relating
many grave slanders and falsehoods about him.
(6) The same rule will apply, even where the deceased himself is said to have
been a slave.
(7) There will also be ground for the application of the Carbonian Edict, where
the Treasury raises the question as to the status of a minor under the age of
puberty.
(8) Pomponius, in the Seventy-ninth Book of the Edict, says that where a son is
appointed an heir, or is disinherited, the Carbonian Edict will not apply, even
though it is denied that he is a son; because being, as it were, appointed
heir, he has possession of the estate, even if he is not a son, or he will be
excluded because of being disinherited, even if it should appear that he is a
son; unless a posthumous child is appointed an heir, and, after his birth, it
is denied that he is a son, although he is said to be under paternal control;
in which case praeto-rian possession should only be given to him in proportion
to the share of the estate to which he was appointed heir.
(9) He also holds that where anyone has disinherited his son, because he said
that he was conceived in adultery, or where it was disputed as to whether he
should be included among his children, he will be entitled to possession of the
estate under this Section of the Edict; for, since he had been disinherited
without giving any reason for it, he would not be entitled to possession of the
estate.
The same rule will apply where the following clause was inserted into a will,
&quot;Let anyone who says that he is my son be disinherited,&quot; because a
son is not disinherited in this way.
(10) If anyone should appoint his son his heir to a very small portion of his
estate, as follows, &quot;Let So-and-So, born of such-and-such a woman, be my
heir,&quot; and afterwards the said son should not admit that his father died
intestate, and that he was his heir at law, it makes a difference whether his
co-heirs deny that he is the son of the testator, or whether they say that the
will is valid. If they say that the will is valid, the dispute should not be
deferred, and the Carbonian Decree will not apply. If, however, they deny that
he is the son of the testator, and allege that the estate belongs to them, as
being the next of kin; possession of the estate will be given to the minor, and
the decision of the controversy will be postponed until he arrives at the age
of puberty.
(11) If the mother is accused of introducing a supposititious child, the
question arises whether the controversy with reference to the civil condition
of the child should be deferred for decision. Where only the condition of the
child is in doubt, the question should be deferred until the age of puberty,
because there may be reason to fear that it will not properly be defended. But
where the mother herself is accused, as there is no doubt that she will, from
the first moment, defend the civil status of the child, with the greatest good
faith and constancy, there is no doubt that an investigation should be made,
and if after the investigation it appears that the child was supposititious,
every action for the recovery of the estate must be refused to it, and
everything will remain in the same condition as if the child had not been
appointed heir.
2. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIV.
Although the woman who is said to have introduced a supposititious child may be
dead, still, if there are any others implicated in the crime, an investigation
should take place at once. When, however, there is no one who can be punished,
because all those who participated in the offence are dead, the investigation
must be deferred until the time of puberty, in accordance with the Carbonian
Edict.
3. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIV.
The Carbonian Edict is applicable to the praetorian possession of an estate
contrary to the provisions of the will, as well as to the possession ab
intestato;since in some instances, the application of the Edict may become
necessary when praetorian possession in accordance with the terms of the will
has been granted; for example, where the testator appointed an heir as follows,
&quot;Let my posthumous child, whether it be a boy or girl, be my heir,&quot;
and it is denied that the statement in the will is true.
(1) Where a question arises with reference to a trust or a legacy, the matter
can be deferred until the time of puberty; as the Divine Pius stated in a
Rescript addressed to Claudius Hadrian.
(2) Although it is certain that praetorian possession under the Carbonian Edict
is not promised to an appointed heir, still, there is no doubt whatever that
any question as to his condition must be postponed until he reaches puberty.
Hence, if at the same time a controversy arises with reference to the estate of
his father and his own condition, this Edict will be applicable. Where,
however, only his civil condition is in dispute, the question will be postponed
until the time of puberty, not under the Carbonian Edict, but in accordance
with the Imperial Constitutions.
(3) The Carbonian Edict gives no relief to children who have arrived at
puberty, even though they are under twenty-five years of age. If, however, a
child, who has arrived at puberty, represents himself as being under that age,
and obtains praetorian possession of the estate, it must be said that the
decree is void. For even if he was under the age of puberty, as soon as he
arrives at that age, the benefit of the possession of the estate will
terminate.
(4) In cases of this kind, an investigation is instituted to prevent possession
of an estate from being given, if the deceit of those who demand possession of
property in behalf of children should be clearly established; therefore, where
possession is demanded under the Car-bonian Edict, the Praetor should
immediately take cognizance of the case. If he finds that it can be easily
decided, and it is positively proved that the child is not a son, he can refuse
to grant it Carbonian possession of the estate. But when he finds that the
matter is involved in doubt, that is to say, that there is some slight evidence
in favor of the child, and it does not clearly appear that he is not the son of
the testator, he shall grant him Carbonian possession of the estate.
(5) Two causes exist for this investigation: one of them is to determine
whether Carbonian possession which confers the advantage of enabling the minor
to obtain praetorian possession, just as if no controversy had arisen, shall be
granted; and the other is, to ascertain whether a decision ought to be rendered
at once, or deferred until the age of puberty. The Praetor should carefully
examine whether it is advantageous for the minor to have the decision rendered
at once; or whether it will be better to postpone it until he reaches the age
of puberty; and this he must, by all means, learn from the relatives, the
mother, and the guardians of the minor.
Suppose, for instance, that there are certain witnesses who, if the decision of
the case is postponed, may either change their minds, or die, or whose
testimony will not have the same force after a long period of time. Or, suppose
there is some old midwife, or certain female slaves who can tell the truth with
reference to the child; or that certain documents essential to his success are
in existence; or that there are other proofs, and the minor will suffer greater
injury if the examination is deferred than he will obtain benefit if the case
is not decided at once.
Suppose that the minor cannot give security, and that those who have been
permitted to obtain possession of the estate are the persons who raised the
controversy with reference to it, and who can abstract, change, or destroy much
of the property belonging to the same; it would be either foolish or unjust for
the Praetor to defer the matter until puberty, to the serious disadvantage of
him who desires the matter to be disposed of.
The Divine Hadrian stated in a Rescript: &quot;Where the decision is ordinarily
deferred until the age of puberty, this is done for the benefit of the minors,
in order that this condition may not be imperiled before they are able to
protect themselves. Moreover, if they have persons by whom they may be properly
defended, and if it is to the interest of the said minors that the case should
be quickly brought to trial, and a decision rendered, and the guardians of the
minors desire it to be heard, what has been devised for the benefit of the
minors should not be employed against them, and their condition remain in
suspense when it can be established beyond a doubt.&quot;
(6) If the mother of the minor, after being accused of having introduced a
supposititious child, gains her case, the question as to the
condition of the child may still remain unsettled; for example, it may be
alleged that it was not begotten by the deceased, or, if it was, that it was
not born in wedlock.
(7) If the person who disputed the condition of the child, and alleged that he
himself was the only son, should die, and his mother should become his heir,
and raise the same controversy with reference to the minor, that her own son
did, stating that he was born of another woman; that is to say, if she should
deny that he was the child of the deceased, and therefore that she herself was
entitled to the entire estate of the deceased son, as his heir, Julianus says
that a decision should not be rendered until the age of puberty, because it
makes no difference whether the person who raises the question does so in his
own name, or in that of the estate. It is evident that if the mother should
admit that the child is the son of the deceased, and therefore claims for
herself only half of the estate of the father, the decision of the case should
not be deferred until the time of puberty; for she does not dispute the claim
of the minor to the estate of his father, but to that of his brother.
(8) Julianus says, in the same place, that if a dispute arises with reference
to the status of two minors under the age of puberty, and one of them reaches
that age, they should wait until the other also arrived at puberty, so that the
condition of both may be determined in such a way that the rights of the one
who had not arrived at puberty, may not be prejudiced through a decision
rendered against the one who had reached that age.
(9) It makes little difference whether the claimant is a minor under the age of
puberty, or the possessor of the estate who raises the question as to the
condition of the minor, for whether he is in possession, or demands it, the
decision must be deferred until the time of puberty.
(10) Where two minors under the age of puberty raise a question as to the
condition of one another, it makes a difference whether one of them alleges
that he is the only son, or whether the other alleges that he also is a son.
For if one says that he is the only son, it must be held that the decision of
the case should be postponed until both of them arrive at puberty, whether the
claimant or the possessor is the one who gives rise to the controversy. If,
however, one alleges that he is the only son, and the other says that he is
also a son, and the former should be the first to reach the age of puberty, the
decision must be deferred on account of the youth of the one who asserts that
he is a son; but this must be done partially and not entirely, for there is no
dispute with reference to half of the estate. Where he who declares that he is
also a son is the first one to attain the age of puberty, and he who alleges
that he is the only son is under that age, the decision shall not be deferred;
for there is no question with reference to the condition of the latter, since
he is the one who makes the contest, as the one who has reached puberty, while
he says that he is a son, does not deny that the other is also a son.
(11) Where a slave who is ordered to be free, and is appointed an heir,
disputes the status of a minor, who is said to be the son of the testator, and
has broken the will of his father, Julianus says that the decision with
reference to both the estate and the bequest of freedom should be deferred
until the age of puberty; for neither of.these questions can be determined at
once without prejudicing the rights of him who says that he is the son of the
testator. Other matters with reference to testamentary bequests of freedom, and
which are pending, shall also be postponed until the time of puberty.
(12) Where a minor under the age of puberty appears, and alleges that he is the
son of the deceased, and debtors to the estate deny that this is true, but say
that the property of the deceased intestate belongs to a relative, who, for
instance, is beyond seas, the child must have recourse to the Carbonian Edict;
but the interest of the absent person must be consulted by requiring security
to be given.
(13) The Praetors exert themselves to place in actual possession those to whom
possession has been given under the Carbonian Edict. If, however, a possessor
under the Carbonian Edict should attempt to claim the estate, or any particular
property belonging to the same, Julianus, in the Twenty-fourth Book of the
Digest, very properly says that he should be barred by an exception, for he
ought to remain content with the privilege of possession which the Praetor in
the meantime has granted him. Therefore, if he wishes to claim the estate, or
any property forming part of the same, he says that he must do so by means of a
direct action in the capacity of heir; so that, after his application, it may
be determined whether he is an heir, and is included among the children, in
order that the presumption of Carbonian possession of the estate may not injure
his adversaries.
This opinion is both reasonable and just.
(14) Moreover, this possession is granted within the year, just as ordinary
ones which are given to children.
(15) It is, however, necessary that he who alleges that he is a son should not
only obtain Carbonian possession of the estate, but should also demand the
ordinary praetorian possession.
(16) The periods necessary for obtaining both possessions run separately. The
one which has for its object ordinary praetorian possession runs from the time
when the son knew that his father was dead, and had the power to demand
pra?torian possession of the estate; and that of Carbonian possession runs from
the time when the son knew that his condition was disputed.
4. Julianus, Digest, Book XX.
Therefore, if a child does not demand possession of the estate under the First
Section, he can, in some instances, obtain possession under the following
Section of the Carbonian Edict, and sometimes he cannot do so; for if a
controversy should arise immediately after the death of the father as to
whether he could demand possession of the estate with the other children, the
year will be considered to have expired at the same time, so far as both
periods are concerned. If, however, after a certain
term has elapsed, he should ascertain that his rights were disputed, he can,
even if the time has expired during which he could have demanded possession of
the estate under the First Section of the Edict, demand it under the Second
Section; and when he has obtained it, he can always avail himself of the
possessory actions. But where judgment has been rendered against him after he
has reached puberty, the actions will be refused him.
5. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XLI.
If he who institutes a contest against the minor is one of the children of the
deceased, the result will be, whether he whose condition is in dispute gives
security, or whether he does not do so, he will still be placed in possession.
(1) If the child under the age of puberty is not defended, and therefore his
adversary is placed in possession, who will have the right to bring the actions
in which the estate is interested? Julianus, in the Twenty-fourth Book of the
Digest, says that a curator should be appointed who can take charge of
everything, and bring the actions. He, moreover, says that the person who is
placed in possession with the minor is not forbidden to institute proceedings
against the curator, for in this way no injury is done to the estate, as he can
legally bring his actions against the minor himself, if he has furnished
security.
(2) Whenever a minor under the age of puberty does not give security, his
adversary is placed in possession, whether he himself gives security or not. If
his adversary wishes the administration of the property to be entrusted to him,
he should furnish security to the minor; but if he does not do so, a curator
should be appointed by whom the property shall be administered.
Again, if the adversary should give security, he ought to sell any property
which is liable to be either destroyed or depreciated by delay, and he must
also collect all debts from the debtors, if they will be released by lapse of
time; the remainder of the estate he shall keep possession of along with the
minor.
(3) Moreover, let us see whether he who is placed in possession under the
Carbonian Edict can diminish the estate in order to provide for his own
support. If the minor has given security, he can use part of the estate for his
support, whether a decree authorizing him to do so has been granted, or not;
and he must return the remainder of the estate to the person who claims it.
If, however, he is unable to give security, and it is evident that he cannot
otherwise support himself, he should be placed in possession in order to enable
him to obtain what is necessary for his subsistence. It ought not to appear
surprising that a person, who may not prove to be the son of the deceased, is
allowed to use part of the property for his support, since an unborn child is
placed in possession of the entire estate by the Edicts, and support is given
to his mother for the benefit of a child that may not be born; and greater care
should be exercised to prevent the son from dying from hunger than to prevent a
smaller
amount of property coming into the hands of the claimant, if it should be
decided that the child was not the son of the deceased.
(4) I think that it should, by all means, be asked of the Praetor that the
documents of the estate shall not be placed in the hands of the adversary, if
he obtains possession; otherwise, the minor may be defrauded either by his
adversary obtaining information through them, or by enabling him to suppress
them.
(5) When neither the minor nor his adversary gives security, a curator should
be appointed who shall administer the property and deliver it to whoever gains
the case.
What, however, must be done if the guardians of the minor demand the
administration ? They should not be heard unless they give security in the name
of the minor, or unless they themselves are appointed curators.
6. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XLI.
The question arises, can a decree be rendered with reference to the property of
a mother? And, in fact, a decree cannot be rendered in this instance, under the
Carbonian Edict; for a long delay should be granted which will defer the
decision until the age of puberty.
(1) Julianus says it is clear that if a controversy arises with reference to
the estates of the father and mother, at the same time, or even with reference
to that of a brother, the decision of the controversy must be postponed until
the time of puberty.
(2) There will be ground for the application of this Edict, even if the
children should obtain praetorian possession ab intestato;even when they demand
it under the last Sections of the Edict, where heirs at law are called to the
succession as they are proper heirs, or under that Section by which possession
is granted to cognates.
(3) This Edict also applies where a controversy exists both with reference to
the status of the minor, and his right to the estate; for if only his status is
involved, as, for instance, where he is said to be a slave, and there is no
dispute as to the estate, under such circumstances the question of his freedom
should be immediately determined.
(4) If he who raises a controversy concerning the minor is placed in possession
with him at the same time, he should not be supported out of the property of
the deceased, nor can he take anything from the estate, for this possession is
only given him in lieu of security.
(5) Not only should support be furnished the minor, but also money for his
education, and all other necessary expenses should be paid in accordance with
the amount of the estate.
(6) The question arises whether he who has been placed in possession under the
Carbonian Edict can, after he arrives at puberty, take the part of plaintiff in
court. It has been established that he can take the part of defendant,
especially if he gives security. Where he does not give security, and is not
prepared to do so, suit can be brought against him as the possessor of the
estate. If he does not then furnish security, possession will be transferred to
his adversary, provided that
he banishes it; just as if the estate had been, from that moment, claimed by
him for the first time.
7. Julianus, Digest, Book XXIV.
If it is denied that a minor has been legally adopted, and for that reason his
right to the estate of his father is disputed, it will not be unjust for a
decree similar to those issued under the Carbonian Edict to be rendered.
(1) Likewise, where a minor, under the age of puberty, is said to have been
given in adoption, and hence his right to the estate of his natural father is
denied, since in this case the question arises whether he is entitled to the
estate as a son, there will be ground for the application of the Carbonian
Edict.
(2) If, however, we suppose that the son is disinherited, it will not be
necessary to postpone the decision of the controversy until the age of puberty,
because the question does not involve the right of the son himself, but the
validity of the will.
(3) If the mother of the person whose freedom and claim to the estate of his
father are in dispute is called into court to testify in a suit brought to
establish his freedom, the decision with reference to his mother should not
always be deferred to the time of puberty; for there are instances where the
cases of those who are said to be supposititious children are determined
without delay.
(4) Whenever a decree is rendered under the Carbonian Edict, the matter is
considered to be in the same condition in which it would have been if no
controversy had arisen with reference to the person who obtained praetorian
possession of the estate.
(5) Again, where two brothers have been placed in possession under this decree,
and one of them refuses to defend his share of his father's estate, the other
will be compelled to defend the whole of it, or abandon it all to the
creditors.
(6) Sometimes, a disinherited son obtains possession of the estate under the
Carbonian Edict, where he does not demand praetorian possession contrary to the
provisions of the will, but, on the ground of intestacy, which is granted to
children; because he denies that his father's will is such that praetorian
possession can be given under it, as it is alleged that he is not his son.
(7) If a minor demands possession of the estate of a freedman of his father,
and it is denied that he is the son of the patron, for the reason that there is
no dispute with reference to the estate of his father, the determination of the
controversy should not be postponed. If, however, this controversy should arise
after a decree under the Carbonian Edict had been rendered, its determination
should be deferred until the time of puberty.
(8) The question arose whether a minor could have possession under the
Carbonian Edict at the same time with the appointed heirs, who obtained it in
accordance with the terms of the will. I answered that if he should not be the
son, or had not obtained praetorian possession of the estate contrary to the
provisions of the will, on the ground
of intestacy, he could obtain it under the Carbonian Edict, at the same time
that the appointed heirs acquired praetorian possession of the estate in
accordance with the provisions of the will.
8. Africanus, Questions, Book IV.
The person whom I declare to be my son, and under my control, died. A minor,
under the age of puberty, appeared, who alleged that the deceased was the
father of a family, and that the estate belonged to him.
It was held that the decree should be rendered.
(1) Again, my emancipated son died intestate, leaving a son under the age of
puberty, who alleged that he was the direct heir. I maintain the latter was
conceived before emancipation took place, and, for this reason, was under my
control, and that the estate of the emancipated son belonged to me.
It was established that this child was the son of the deceased, but a question
arose as to his legal condition, that is to say, whether he was under the
control of his father, or not; and there is no doubt whatever that the
Carbonian Edict is applicable in this instance.
9. Neratius, Parchments, Book VI.
Labeo stated that whenever a minor is said to be supposititious, and a
controversy arises with reference to his right to his father's estate, the
Praetor should be careful to place him in possession of the same. I think that
Labeo intended this to be applicable to a child born after the death of his
father, who alleges that he was his son, even though the deceased thought that
he had no children; for he who has been acknowledged by the person whose estate
is in dispute has a more equitable claim to it than a posthumous child.
10. Marcellus, Digest, Book VII.
Where a woman, to whom an oath has been tendered by the heir, swears that she
is pregnant, possession of the estate should be granted under the Carbonian
Edict, or it should be refused if she tendered the oath to the heir; for
possession should be given after proper cause has been shown to prevent the
heir from being prejudiced if it should be given; or if it should be denied, to
avoid depriving the minor of his legal rights.
11. Papinianus, Questions, Book XIII.
There is no ground for the application of the Carbonian Edict, where the son,
whose civil condition is contested, cannot become the heir without the
intervention of the Praetor; for example, if he has been appointed. The same
rule applies where it is certain that he still cannot be the heir, even though
he may be the son; as, for instance, if Titius was appointed heir, and a
posthumous child or a disinherited minor should be denied to be the son of the
testator.
Nor does it make any difference what interest the minor may have in being
proved to be the son, with reference to other matters, for ex-
ample, in order to obtain the property of his brother by another mother; or to
acquire rights over freedmen and burial places; for it is established that
these cases do not come under the Carbonian Edict.
12. The Same, Questions, Book XIV.
An appointed heir, against whom a minor son who is said to be supposititious
demands praetorian possession under the First Section of the Edict, as in the
case of an heir at law, cannot, in the meantime, obtain possession in
accordance with the provisions of the will. If, however, in the interim, either
the appointed heir, or he who is entitled to possession as the heir at law,
should die, relief must be granted to his heirs. For what if they had not been
able to enter upon the estate, because the law prevented them from doing so, or
on account of the decision of the controversy being doubtful ?
13. Paulus, Opinions, Book XI.
Titia had a posthumous child after the death of her husband, and Sempronius
brought an accusation of adultery against her before the Governor of the
province. I ask whether trial of the accusation of adultery should be deferred
until the age of puberty, in order that the rights of the posthumous child may
not be prejudiced. Paulus answered that if there was no question as to the
right of the minor to the estate of her father, her guardians have no reason to
defer the trial for adultery until their ward reaches the age of puberty.
14. Scasvola, Opinions, Book II.
The question arises whether a minor under puberty has obtained possession of an
estate by the Carbonian Edict, and reaches that age before the possession has
been transferred to him, can perform the duties of plaintiff. The answer was
that he must introduce proof of any claim which he makes against the possessor.
15. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book HI.
This possession will benefit the minor if security is furnished not only to
obtain actual possession, but also to recover property, to collect debts, to
give dowries, and to do everything else which we have already stated is liable
to contribution in collation.
16. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XLI.
Just as security is given to an emancipated son with reference to the estate of
his father, so it must also be given to a minor with reference to the property
which he himself places in collation.


* 37.XI. CONCERNING PRAETORIAN POSSESSION OF AN ESTATE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THE WILL.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIX.
By a will we should understand any kind of material upon which it is written;
therefore, whether it is written upon tablets of wood, or
upon those of any other kind of material, or upon papyrus, or parchment, or
upon the skin of any animal whatsoever, it is also properly designated a will.1
(1) The Praetor does not, under this Section of the Edict, confirm all wills,
but only the last ones; that is to say, those which were most recently made,
and after which no others have been drawn up. A last will is not one which was
executed at the very time of death, but one after which no other has been
executed, even though it is old.
(2) It is sufficient for there to be a will, although it may not be produced,
if it is certain that it does exist. Therefore, if it is in possession of a
thief, or in the hands of one with whom it has been deposited
1 There were many kinds of wills at Civil Law. The most ancient division was
that of testamenta in pace,and testamenta in procinctu;or such as were executed
in peace, and those executed in war, which classification probably antedates
the Twelve Tables by many centuries. Originally, among the Romans, the
testamentary disposition of property, as afterwards accepted, and as provided
for by modern jurisprudence, was unknown. Rules for inheritance were
prescribed, but if the owner of an estate wished it to belong to any others
than those designated by law as entitled to receive it, he was obliged to
dispose of it during his lifetime. So jealously were testamentary bequests
regarded in the beginning that, where a man desired to make such a disposition
of his property, a special enactment was, in every instance, requisite for its
validity. Hence, testamenta in pacewere openly made in the Comitia,or public
assemblies of citizens; a proceeding no doubt based upon the principle of the
communal origin of property which, at the death of the owner, reverted to the
people, whose approbation, either express or implied, was indispensable to the
transmission of ownership.
In time of war, the urgency of the case rendered a modification of this
ceremony imperative; and the testamentum in procinctu,or will executed under
arms, while the soldier was fully equipped for battle, came into use. Fewer
witnesses were required under these circumstances to establish the validity of
a soldier's will and it is not positively known whether their number was
indefinite, or whether only two were necessary; the weight of authority,
however, apparently tending to confirm the latter opinion. Military wills of
this description were held by some authorities to be only temporary and
conditional in character, and unless the testator lost his life in the combat
about to take place, they were considered as of no force or effect. Their
renewal therefore became advisable on the eve of every impending engagement.
After the will executed comitiis calatis,came that per ses et libram,where a
fictitious sale of the estate to the appointed heir took place in the presence
of seven persons, five of whom were witnesses, and all Roman citizens, whose
verbal attestation only was deemed essential, their signatures not being
required.
The testamentum prastoriumwas introduced by the Prsetor as a substitute for
that per ses et libram,,and its execution was invested with even more legal
formalities than that of the latter. In it the requirement of seven witnesses,
the attachment of whose seals and signatures to the instrument was obligatory,
appears for the first time in Roman jurisprudence. The witnesses were required
to sign and seal the will in the presence of the testator, and of one another.
If the person who made it was, either through disease or ignorance, unable to
write or affix his seal, someone was called in to do this at his direction.
A will might be either public or private, general or special, written, or
verbal, holographic or allographie. A general will was one which any Roman
citizen could make; a special or privileged one could be executed by a soldier
or a sailor, to whose calling extraordinary indulgence was conceded. Much
importance was always attached to the execution of written wills, by which
alone heirs could be appointed, and not only the capacity of the testator, but
also the qualifications of the witnesses was thoroughly investigated; the
enumeration and description of the
for safe-keeping, there is no doubt that praetorian possession of the estate
should be granted; for it is not necessary to open the will in order that
praetorian possession may be obtained in accordance with its provisions.
(3) Again, it is necessary for the will to have been in existence at the time
of the death of the testator, even if it may have ceased to exist afterwards,
hence, where it has subsequently been destroyed praetorian possession can be
demanded.
(4) Nevertheless, we require that the heir should know that the will existed,
and be certain that the possession of the estate was given to him by its
provisions.
different heirs were set forth in such a way that no mistake could be made; and
the property which was the subject of each individual bequest was specified
with the greatest minuteness.
Nuncupative wills were mere verbal statements of the testamentary disposition
of property, and differed in no respect from the ordinary testament, except
that they were not reduced to writing. The nomination of an heiralways
considered by the Romans as indispensable to testationwas as valid by a verbal
as by a written will; the same number of witnesses was required; and the rights
of inheritance and ownership of an estate vested without distinction under the
provisions of both. If a nuncupative will was subsequently committed to writing
and subscribed by the witnesses, this did not render it a written testament in
the eye of the law; it always remained nuncupative.
A holographic will was, of course, one entirely written by the testator in his
own hand; where it was taken down at his dictation, either by slaves, freedmen,
friends, lawyers or other persons, it was styled allographic.
The Imperial will which was public, and a privileged document, was acknowledged
by the testator personally or in writing, before the Emperor or a competent
magistrate, and then registered. No witnesses were necessary to establish the
authenticity of an act invested with such solemnity, but it was absolutely
essential that the instrument should be in writing, and that every legal
provision relative to its execution and delivery should be complied with; even
the minutest deviation from their requirements rendered it void. Allowance was
also made by law for a sparse population, the general illiteracy of the people,
and the trying conditions incident to epidemics. Where a will was executed in
the country, and the neighborhood was thinly settled, or the inhabitants
uneducated, five witnesses were all that were deemed requisite; and any one of
them could sign the names of the others, with their consent. The diminution of
the number, however, was based solely on the presumption that no more could be
obtained; if this was ascertained to be otherwise, or it could be proved that
persons able to write could have been called in, the document was void. As
anyone ill with a contagious disease is naturally avoided by his acquaintances,
seven witnesses could hardly be collected at one time by the bedside of a
person attacked by the plague; hence they were permitted to attach their
signatures and seals singly, and the unitas actus,or attestation in the
presence of each other, was dispensed with. In cases of this kind the burden of
proof rested upon the party contesting the validity of the document.
The execution of a testamentum parentum inter liberoswas another instance in
which the strict observance of the rules governing the testamentary disposal of
estates was not exacted. By means of it, any person could designate which one
of his descendants he desired to succeed to the inheritance. It might be either
written or nuncupative. The signatures of only two witnesses were obligatory,
and the testator could, if he desired to do so, disinherit any or all of his
children or grandchildren by it, with the same facility as under the ordinary
will.
For many centuries, the Roman practice discouraged the drawing of wills by any
other agency than that of the testator himself, except in case of urgent
necessity; a strong prejudice existing against the employment of members of the
legal
(5) Where anyone makes two copies of his will, and one of them remains, and the
other is destroyed, the will is considered to be in existence, and praetorian
possession of the estate can be demanded.
(6) Even if the testator made two wills, and sealed them at the same time, and
appointed different heirs by each one, and both are in existence; possession of
the estate can be obtained under both, because they are considered as one
document and the last will of the testator.
profession for this purpose, as is disclosed by the popular saying, &quot;A
testamento dolus malus et jurisconsultus abesto.&quot;
The Visigoths required a written will to be published either in the presence of
the witnesses or of an ecclesiastic, within six months after its execution, in
order to insure its validity. &quot;Scripta voluntas defuncti ante sex menses
coram quolibet sacerdote vel testibus publicetur.&quot;Holographic wills were
permitted where the circumstances were such that a regular will could not have
been drawn up, and its authenticity was proved before a priest or a judge, by
comparison with three other documents which there was no doubt had been written
or signed by the testator. Such a testament was legal even if it did not come
into the hands of the beneficiaries or heirs for thirty years. &quot;Quam
sacerdos idem, et index adlatis sibi-met tribus aliis scripturis, in quibus
testatoris subscript reperitur, ex earum con-tropatione considerent, si certa
et evidens scriptura est quam idem conditor holo-grapha ratione
conscripserit.&quot; (Forum JudicumII, V, 13, 15.)
King Alfonso X, in his famous compilation, adopted the provision of the Civil
Law with reference to testaments, without any substantial alteration. (Las
Siete Partidas,VI, I, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7.)
Both written and nuncupative wills are recognized as valid by Moslems,
preference being given to the latter, which are much more common. They must be
attested by at least two male witnesses, or by one male and two females. A
testator cannot dispose of more than one-third of his estate to the prejudice
of his heirs without their consent. Where a legacy is left to one heir, it does
not vest unless it is sanctioned by all the others. If a legatee should be
responsible for the death of the testator to whose generosity he is indebted,
the bequest becomes of no effect, unless the heirs agree that he shall receive
it; a provision which might, with great advantage, be adopted in many Christian
countries where the assassination of husbands and parricide are not infrequent.
In order for a verbal bequest to be valid, the person making it must be
actually moribund, and the disease acute; those who suffer from chronic
affections of long standing, and are in no immediate danger of dissolution, are
debarred from this privilege. In cases which admit of ambiguity, the intention
of the testator is all important, and must be definitely ascertained. A man
cannot, as under the Roman Law, dispose of property to which he has no title,
and trust to the chance of its purchase by the heir, either ownership, or
unquestionable right to whatever is the subject of the bequest is
indispensable. (Hughes, Dictionary of Islam, Page 667, Art. &quot;Wills;&quot;
The Hedaya, LIL 1, 2; Syed Ameer Ali, Mohammedan Law, Vol. I, XVIII, 1, 2.)
According to the Spanish Code, an ordinary will may be holographic, open, or
secret. An open will is one where the disposition of the testator's property is
publicly stated in the presence of those summoned to witness or authorize its
execution ; a secret will is one the contents of which are not disclosed, but
which, when presented for attestation, is declared by the person who made it to
set forth his final wishes as to the division of his estate among his heirs or
legatees. An ordinary will must be acknowledged before a Notary and three
competent witnesses, who can see and hear the testator, and at least one of
whom must be able to write. It is the duty of the Notary always to certify
that, to the best of his knowledge, the testator is possessed of the legal
capacity requisite for the execution of such an instrument, and he must state
at its end that all the necessary formalities have been observed.
(7) If, however, a testator should execute a will, and also a copy of the same,
and if the one which he intended to be his will is in existence, praetorian
possession of the estate can be demanded; but Pomponius says that if only the
copy is in existence, possession of the estate cannot be claimed.
(8) For possession to be given of an estate of anyone, the Praetor requires
that he should have the right of testation, not only when he
Where death is imminent, the testator can publish his will in the presence of
five competent witnesses; and, in case of an epidemic, only three, who must be
over seventeen years of age, and may be of either sex, are necessary. In both
the above-mentioned instances, the services of a Notary are dispensed with. The
instrument will be void if the testator should live more than two months after
its execution. Unitas actusis requisite whenever possible.
Military and maritime testaments, being of a special character, are, as at
Civil Law, divested of many of the formalities essential to the validity of
those executed under different circumstances. (Codigo Civil de Espana,Arts.
676, 679, 680, 694, 695, 716, 722.)
Holographic wills, as such, are not recognized by Portuguese jurisprudence;
only such as are either public or secret are the subject of legislation. Each
of them must be executed in the presence of a Notary and five witnesses. The
testator must attach his signature to every leaf of the document. He can retain
possession of it himself; entrust it for safe-keeping to a friend; or deposit
it in the government office of the district allotted for this purpose, when a
record of the same is made in accordance with the prescribed regulations.
&quot;O testador, que quiser fazer testamento par esta forma, declarard a sua
ultima vontade perante qualquer tabellido, e cinco testemunhas idoneas.&quot;
&quot;A pessoa, que assinar o testamento, deve rubricar todas as folhas
d'elle.&quot;
&quot;O testador pode conservar o testamento na sua mdo, com/metier a guarda
d'elle a pessoa de sua confianca, ou depositd lo no archivo testamentario de
qualquer districto administrative.&quot; (Codigo Civil Portuguez,Arts. 1912,
1920, 1927.)
French law exacts that a will publicly executed shall be accepted by two
Notaries, and acknowledged in the presence of two witnesses, or by one Notary
in the presence of four. A secret or mystic will is presented sealed to the
Notary, who attaches to it a certificate setting forth that the document
contains the final dispositions of the testator, which must be signed by both
of them, and by at least six witnesses. Persons who cannot read are prohibited
from making mystic wills. Witnesses must be of full age, and may be of either
sex. A husband and his wife cannot attest the same will. &quot;Le testament par
acte public est celui qui est rec.u par deux notaires, en presence de deux
temoins, ou par un notaire, en presence de quatre temoins.&quot;
&quot;Ceux qui ne savent ou ne peuvent lire, ne pourront faire de dispositions
dans la forme du testament mystique.&quot;
&quot;Les temoins appeles pour etre presents aux testaments devront etre
majeurs, Fran$ais, sans distinction de sexe. Toutefois le mari et la femme ne
pourront etre temoins ensemble dans le meme testament.&quot; (Code Civil de
France,Arts. 971, 978, 980.)
The Italian and Belgian Codes relating to the testamentary disposition of
estates are practically identical with that of France. (Codice Civile del Regna
d'ltalia,Arts. 774, 800. Code Civil de Belgique,Arts. 968, 997.)
The rules regulating the execution of wills in Sweden are not nearly so strict
as in many other countries.
Two witnesses are required, but if it can be established that none were
available at the time of the testator's death, his will is, nevertheless,
valid; provided he himself signed it. (Sveriges Rikes Lag: Arvdabalk16, Kap.1.)
In Austria, likewise, a will may be legally executed without witnesses, but, in
this case, it must be holographic, and signed by the testator. It is not even
neces-
made the will, but also at the time of his death; hence, if a minor under the
age of puberty, or an insane person, or anyone else of those who have not
testamentary capacity should make a will and afterwards became competent to do
so, and die, praetorian possession of his estate cannot be demanded.
If, however, a son under paternal control, thinking that he was the head of a
household when he was not, should make a will, and afterwards be found to be
his own master at the time of his death, possession of his estate in accordance
with the provisions of the will cannot be claimed under the terms of the
Praetorian Edict. But if a son under paternal control, who was a veteran,
should make a will disposing of
sary to insert the date, or the place where it was drawn up; still, this is
stated to be advisable in order to avoid the risk of a contest.
When drawn up by another three witnesses are required, at least two of whom
must be present. This rule also applies to the proof of nuncupative wills.
&quot;Wer schriftlich, und ohne Zeugen testiren will, der muss das Testament
oder Codicill eigenhandig schreiben, und eigenhandig mit seinem Nahmen
unterfertigen. Die Beysetzung des Tages, des Jahres, und des Ortes, wo der
letzte Wille errichtet wird, ist ewar nicht nothwendig, aber zur Vermeidung der
Streitigkeiten rdthlich.&quot;
&quot;Er muss ferner vor drey fahigen Zeugen, wovon wenigstens zwey zugleich
gegenwartig seyn sollen, den Aufsatz als seinen letzten Willen
best&amp;tigen.&quot;
&quot;Eine mundliche letzte Anordnung muss, um rechtskraftig zu seyn, auf Ver-
langen eines jeden, dem daran gelegen ist, durch die iibereinstimmende eidliche
Aussage der drey Zeugen, oder wofern Einer aus ihnen nicht mehr vernommen
werden kann, wenigstens der zwey iibrigen bestatiget werden.&quot; (Allgemeines
Bur-gerliches Gesetzbuch,Arts. 578, 579, 586.)
The Code of Holland prescribes that a notary and two witnesses shall be present
when either an holographic, or an ordinary will is made. A secret will must be
closed and sealed by the testator before a Notary and four witnesses. Both of
these wills are registered, and placed for safe-keeping in the hands of the
Notary, and after the death of the testator are delivered to the judge of the
district, who opens them, and then returns them to the Notary, who informs the
heirs or other parties interested.
&quot;Dezelve moet door den erflater bij eenen notaris in bewaring warden
gesteld.&quot;
&quot;De notaris, bijgestaan door twee getuigen, zal daarvan onmiddellijk eene
door
hem met den erflater en de getuigen geteekende akte van bewaargeving
opmaken.&quot;
&quot;Een uiterste wil bij openbare akte moet ten overstaan van eenen notaris,
en
in tegenwoordigheid van twee geruigen, warden verleden,&quot;
&quot;Na den dood van den erflater, moet de besloten of geheime uiterste wil
warden aangeboden aan den regter van het kanton alwaar de erfenis is
opengevallen; deze regter zal dien uitersten wil openen en proces-verbaal
opmakes van de aan-bieding en de opening van den uitersten wil, alsmede van den
stoat waarim zich dezelve bevindt, en dit stuk daarna aan den notaris, die de
aanbieding heeft gedaan, terug geven.&quot; (Burgerlijk Wetboek,Arts. 979, 985,
989.)
The law of Japan relating to wills follows very closely those of France and
Italy. It authorizes the same three different kinds of testaments, and provides
for the presence of a Notary. Two or more witnesses are necessary. When the
testator is moribund, he may dispose of his property verbally before at least
three witnesses. The person to whom the statements are made must commit them to
writing, read them aloud, and have them attested. Such a will to be valid must
be certified by a Court within twenty days after its execution. The Code also
makes provision for nuncupative wills in the case of soldiers and sailors.
(Civil Code of Japan, Arts. 1067, 1068, 1069, 1079.)
In all countries whose testamentary legislation is based upon the Civil Law,
the Notary is obliged to copy the entire will in his Register, with his
official certificate, and add any explanatory notes which he may deem
necessary.
his castrense peculium,and afterwards be emancipated, or become the head of a
family and then die, praetorian possession of his estate can be demanded.
If anyone should have the power to make a will at both the times above
mentioned, but should not have that power in the interval, praetorian
possession of his estate can be claimed in accordance with the provisions of
his will.
(9) Moreover, if anyone should make a will, and afterwards be deprived of
testamentary capacity either through becoming insane, or for the reason that he
was forbidden to manage his property, posses-
In England, testamentary disposition was introduced by the clergy with a view
to the increase of their influence, and the pecuniary advantage of the Church.
To them also is to be attributed the conveyance of real property by means of
instruments in writing, other than wills. The idea that it was disgraceful,
indeed, almost criminal, to die intestate, which was originally derived from
the Romans, and sedulously inculcated from the pulpit, as well as by private
exhortation, promoted in no inconsiderable degree the exaltation and power of
their order. By means of their practical monopoly of the scanty learning of the
age, the reverence with which their ministration was regarded, and their
position as advisers of the people, in not only religious but temporal matters,
they gradually and insidiously obtained jurisdiction over everything connected
with the distribution of estates, some of which privileges they have only in
very recent times been compelled to relinquish. The office of Lord High
Chancellor, the chief judicial dignitary of the realm, was for centuries an
exclusive appendage of the ecclesiastical profession. To the clergy is to be
credited the invention of uses or trusts, by which the enjoyment of property,
especially land, was transferred through a third party in whom the legal title
was vested. By means of this ingenious device, the Statutes of Mortmain and
other laws of England were successfully evaded, the Church enriched, and the
vow of poverty, presumably affecting persons in priestly orders, to all intents
and purposes annulled. The use or trust, at Common Law, did not, as would at
first sight seem probable, directly derive its origin from the fideieomissumof
the Romans; and, while it bore a considerable resemblance to a chose in action,
which could not be assigned, still it might pass by means of a secret deed, or
by will, as actual delivery of possession was not required, since the land
itself was not conveyed. Plowden refers to the devise of an use to a wife by
her husband, and the right of the heir to appeal as follows: &quot;Home deuise
terre en Londres a so. feme pur vie, sur condition que si el marie, que le
terre remainera a son, fils en taile, &amp; pur default de tiel issue, le
remainder a les droit heires le donour en fee, le feme prist baron &amp; el
&amp; le baron occupia le 'terre, cestuy in remainder morust sans heire de son
corps, le droit heire le donour auera especial briefe de 'ex graviquerala'
direct al Maior &amp; viconts de Lnundres, rehersant cest especial deuise et.
le dit matter; eux commandant de appeler les parties, et de eux oyer &amp;c, et
de faire droit.&quot;(Plowden, Les Commentaries ou Reports,Pages 413, 414.)
There is no doubt that the ancient Anglo-Saxons made use of certain forms
established by law or custom by which they disposed of their property at death.
These testaments, however, bore no resemblance to those instituted by the Roman
jurists, and were, principally, benefactions made to the Church, usually
extorted as above mentioned, by its shrewd and thrifty servants from the
remorse and fears of the dying sinner. Such dispositions were often conditional
upon the enjoyment of the devise during the life of the donor; were designated,
&quot;Post obitum suum donationes;&quot;and included both real and personal
property. They were almost invariably nuncupative.
With the advent of the Norman Conquest and the introduction of feudalism, lands
could no longer be disposed of in this manner without the consent of the lord
of the fee, or the king, who being directly interested in the maintenance of
his right to their control as the chief basis of his dignity and power, was
naturally
sion of his estate can be demanded under the Edict, because his will is valid
in law. Generally speaking, this may be said of all persons of this kind who
have lost the power to make a will at the time of their death; but their wills
executed before that time are valid.
(10) Where the cord which binds the tablets of the will together is cut, even
though this was done against the wish of the testator, praetorian possession of
the estate can be demanded. If, however, the testator himself should cut it,
the will is not considered to have been sealed, and therefore possession of the
estate cannot be claimed.
(11) If the tablets on which the will is written should be gnawed by mice, or
the cord be broken in some other way, either through being decayed by age, or
by the dampness of the place where it was deposited, or by a fall, the will is
considered to have been sealed; especially if you suppose that it is fastened
with only one cord. If a cord is wound three or four times around the tablets,
it must be held that they are sealed, even though it may be cut or gnawed in
one place.
indisposed to relinquish it. This change, while it was gradual and extended
over the greater part of a century, was none the less effective, and in the end
practically annulled the right to the unrestricted devise of real property
which had previously existed.
Another reason given for the adoption of this rule was that, where the testator
was about to die, advantage would be taken of his mental and physical weakness
by strangers, to the prejudice of his heirs. &quot;An Estate in Fee could not
be devised by the Common Law, because it was presumed that he would be that in
extremisthat he would not be in his Health, that it proceeded from the
Distemper of his Mind by the Anguish of his Disease, or by sinister Persuasion,
to which he is now more subject than he was in his Health.&quot; (Danvers, A
General Abridgment of the Common Law, Vol. II, Page 513.)
The early English authorities considered a devise where death was impending as
prima facieevidence of insanity; nevertheless, it was valid if the heir gave
his consent. &quot;Unde presumeretur quod si quis in infirmitate positus ad
mortem; dis-tribuere cepisset terrain sua/m, quod in sanitate sua minime facere
voluisse: quod potius proveniret illud ex furore animi quam ex mentis
deliberatione, posset tamen hujusmodi donatio in ultima voluntate alicui facto,
ita tenere si cum consensu heredis her et &amp; ex fuo consensu
confirmaretur.&quot; (Glanvil, Tractatus de Legibus et Consuetudinibus Regni
Angliie,VII, I.)
Still another reason, that is to say, want of consideration for their transfer
of the estate, or any portion of the same, was suggested as contributing to
render a legacy bequeathed to the Church by a person in articulo mortisinvalid,
under such circumstances. &quot;Traditionibus et usucapionibus dominia rerum,
non nudis pactis transferuntur.&quot;(Cod. Just. II, III, 20.)
A married woman was held to possess testamentary capacity provided her husband,
after her decease, ratified her act. &quot;A Feme Covert may make a Testament
if the Baron agrees to it after her Death.&quot; (Danvers, A General Abridgment
of the Common Law, Vol. II, Page 512.) The reason for this was, of course,
because the wife could not, separate and apart from her husband, hold property
during marriage, unless in case of separation. &quot;Omnia qux sunt uxoris,
sunt ipsius viri. Non habet uxor potestatem sui, sed vir.&quot;(Coke,
Institutes, II, 168.)
Authorities differ as to the object of the adoption of the Statute of Uses. (27
Hen. Vill, 10.) Some hold that was intended to entirely abolish a proceeding by
which the control of lands in England was rapidly passing into the hands of the
clergy; others were of the opinion that the intention of the legislators was to
transform equitable into legal estates; others, again, maintained that the
exclusion of the Court of Chancery from jurisdiction over real property of
every description was the purpose of the enactment, on the ground that in that
tribunal,
2. The Same, On the Edict, Book XLI.
The PraBtor has adopted a most equitable order of succession in the Edict. For
he desires that, in the first place, the children shall be entitled to
possession of the estate in opposition to the terms of the will, and then, if
this should not be done, the will of the deceased must be complied with.
Therefore the matter must remain in abeyance for the time during which the
children can demand possession of the estate. When this period has elapsed, or
if before this they should die, or reject the estate, or should lose the right
to claim possession of it, then possession of the estate under the Praetorian
Edict will revert to the appointed heirs.
(1) Where a son is appointed an heir under a condition, Julianus very properly
holds that he can demand possession of the estate in accordance with the terms
of the will, in the capacity of appointed heir, no matter what the condition
is, even if it should be as follows,
always presided over by a prelate of the highest rank, ecclesiastical influence
was necessarily paramount. Be that as it may, this Statute, and the Statute of
Frauds (29 Car. II, 3) effectually disposed of the abuses attending such
conveyances of property, which were fast becoming a serious menace to the
prosperity of the
Kingdom.
In former times, few formalities were necessary for the execution of wills
bequeathing personal property in England. In case of an holographic will, only
proof of the handwriting of the testator was requisite. If it was established,
it made no difference whether or not the instrument was either signed or
sealed. No witnesses were necessary to render an holographic, or indeed any
other will disposing of chattels valid. Such an instrument would be good in
law, even though written by another person and unsigned by the testator, if it
could be proved that the latter had ordered it to be drawn, or subsequently
ratified it. Two or more witnesses, who must attach their signatures at the
same time in the presence of the testator and of each other, are now required
in all testamentary dispositions.
Nuncupative wills were subjected to so many restrictions by the Statute of
Prauds, some of which it was impossible at times to observe, that they fell
into disuse. They were expressly abolished by Statute I, Vict. 26, 9.
In Scotland, in the designation of wills, a distinction of terms existed.
&quot;The word testament or will is used to denote a testament of movable
property only.&quot;
&quot;Unless the will is holographic, or is contained on one sheet of paper,
each page must be signed by the testator.&quot;
Testamentary execution and attestation do not entirely coincide with what is
prescribed by the English law. &quot;Witnesses need not sign their names in the
presence of the testator.&quot; (Paterson, A Compendium of English and Scotch
Law, I, Secs. 660, 666.)
Nuncupative wills are valid when the bequest does not exceed $500 in value.
&quot;No nuncupative will or legacy is available beyond 100 Scots.&quot;
(More, Lectures on the Law of Scotland, Vol. II, Sec. Vill.) &quot;Nuncupative,
or verbal testaments, are not, by the law of Scotland, effectual for supporting
the nomination of an executor, let the subject of them be ever so small.&quot;
(Erskine, Principles of the Law of Scotland, III, IX, 2.)
Other testamentary regulations, as a rule, correspond with those of England.
The legislation of the different States composing the Union exhibit only a few
unimportant variations so far as the form, execution, and proof of wills are
concerned. From two to three witnesses are required, except in Louisiana, where
three witnesses and a notary, or five witnesses without one must be present
when a nuncupative testament is made. In some States, neither nuncupative nor
holographic wills are allowed; in others, both are sanctioned by law. The
general provisions of the Statute of Frauds have been adopted almost everywhere
in this country.ED.
&quot;when a ship should arrive from Asia.&quot; And although the condition may
not be fulfilled, the Praetor must, nevertheless, protect the son whom he
permits to have possession in accordance with the provisions of the will, even
if he had already obtained possession in opposition to them. This protection is
especially necessary to a son who has been emancipated.
(2) Each appointed heir shall be given possession of the estate in proportion
to the share of the same which has been bequeathed to him, in such a way,
however, that if there is no one who demands it with him he may have sole
possession. Nevertheless, while one of the heirs is deliberating whether or not
he will take praetorian possession of the estate, possession of the share of
his co-heir shall not be granted the latter.
(3) Where one substitute has been appointed for an heir if he should die within
ten years, and another if he should die between the ages of ten and fourteen
years, and the heir dies before he is ten years old, the first substitute will
become the heir, and will obtain praetorian possession of the estate; but if
the heir should die after he is ten years old, and before he reaches his
fourteenth year, the second substitute will become the heir, and will obtain
possession; but both cannot be joined, as each of them is substituted under a
different condition.
(4) Praetorian possession of an estate in accordance with the terms of the will
is granted to heirs appointed in the first degree, and afterwards, if they do
not claim it, to the substitutes who come next in order, as well as to those
who were substituted for the substitutes; and we grant possession to
substitutes in regular order. We should understand heirs to be appointed in the
first degree who are appointed first; for as they have the prior right to
accept the estate, so also they should be the first entitled to praetorian
possession.
(5) If anyone should say in his will, &quot;Let the first be heir to half of my
estate and if he should not be my heir, let the second be my heir; let the
third be my heir to half of my estate, and if he does not become my heir, let
the fourth be my heir,&quot; the first and the third are those who will be
permitted to obtain praetorian possession of the estate.
(6) If anyone should appoint heirs as follows, &quot;Let whichever of my
brothers who shall marry Seia be the heir to three-fourths of my estate, and
let the one who does not marry her be the heir to a fourth of the same,&quot;
it is evident that if Seia should die, the heirs will be entitled to equal
shares of the estate. If, however, she should be married to one of them, he
will be entitled to three-fourths, and the other to one-fourth of the estate,
respectively; but neither of them can demand praetorian possession before the
condition has been complied with.
(7) If the name of the heir has been designedly erased, it is settled beyond a
doubt that he cannot demand praetorian possession of the estate, any more than
one who has been appointed an heir without consulting the testator; for he is
considered as not having been designated whom the testator did not wish to
appoint.
(8) Where two heirs are appointed, namely the first and the second, and a third
is substituted for the second, if the second declines to take possession of the
estate, the third will succeed to his place. If, however, the third should
refuse to enter upon the estate, or to take praetorian possession of the same,
possession of it will revert to the first; nor will it be necessary for him to
demand praetorian possession, for it will accrue to him by operation of law, as
praetorian possession accrues to an appointed heir in the same manner as his
share of the estate.
(9) Where a slave is appointed an heir, praetorian possession of the estate is
given to his master to whom the estate will belong; for praetorian possession
follows the ownership of the property. Therefore, if at the time of the death
of the testator, the appointed heir, Stichus, was the slave of Sempronius, and
Sempronius did not order him to enter upon the estate because of his death, or
for the reason that he had alienated the slave, and the latter had become the
property of Septitius, the result will be that if Septitius should order the
slave to accept the estate, praetorian possession of the same will be given to
Septitius, for the estate will belong to him. Wherefore, if a slave should pass
to three or four masters in succession we will grant praetorian possession of
the estate to the last of them.
3. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XLI.
It is true that every posthumous child who was unborn at the time of the death
of the testator can demand praetorian possession of the estate after his birth.
4. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XL1L
The term &quot;papyrus&quot; applies not only to such as is new, but also to
that which has been already used. Hence, if anyone should draw up his will upon
a sheet the back of which is already written on, praetorian possession of
property based on such a will can be obtained.
5. The Same, Disputations, Book IV.
Where anyone is appointed an heir under a condition, and after he has obtained
praetorian possession in accordance with the terms of the will, the condition
is not fulfilled, the result will be that the property in the meantime will
remain in the hands of the possessor; as,' for instance, where an emancipated
son is appointed an heir conditionally. For, if the condition should fail to be
fulfilled, Julianus says that he can, nevertheless, obtain praetorian
possession in accordance with the terms of the will; but he also says that he
should be protected if he is one who can obtain praetorian possession of the
estate as heir at law. This is our present practice.
(1) Let us see whether legacies must be paid by these heirs. The son, indeed,
who has obtained possession, as it were, contrary to the [provisions of the
will, is considered to hold the estate by virtue of his appointment, but the
others hold it as heirs at law; therefore the son is only compelled to pay the
legacies left to descendants and as-
cendants, but not those left to others. It is evident that a trust must be
executed for the benefit of him who was entitled to it as heir-at-law; as
otherwise it would seem that praetorian possession under the terms of the will
had been claimed for the purpose of defrauding him.
6. The Same, Disputations, Book Vill.
Those who have been appointed heirs conditionally can demand praetorian
possession in accordance with the terms of the will, even while the condition
is pending, and has not yet been fulfilled, provided they have been legally
appointed; for where anyone has been illegally appointed, his nomination will
be of no advantage to him in obtaining praetorian possession of the estate.
7. Julianus, Digest, Book XXIII.
When the tablets of the will were sealed in several places, and some of the
seals are broken but seven still remain, this will be sufficient to enable
praetorian possession of the estate to be granted; just as where the seals of
seven witnesses appear, although they may not include the seals of all who
sealed the will.
8. The Same, Digest, Book XXIV.
If the following was inserted into a will, &quot;Let Sempronius be the heir to
half of my estate; let Titius be an heir to a third of my estate, if a ship
should arrive from Asia; and let the said Titius be the heir to a sixth of my
estate, if a ship should not arrive from Asia,&quot; in this instance, Titius
is not appointed heir to two different shares of the estate, but he is
understood to be substituted for himself, and therefore he is held to be
entitled to no larger a share than one-third. In accordance with this
statement, as a sixth of the estate remains undisposed of, Titius will not only
obtain possession of a third of the same under the Praetorian Edict, but also
of the sixth which will accrue to him.
(1) Where a substitute is appointed for a son under the age of puberty, as
follows, &quot;If my son should die before reaching the age of puberty, then
let Titius be my heir,&quot; he can claim the estate just as if the word
&quot;my&quot; had not been added, and he can also obtain praetorian possession
of it.
(2) If a mistake is made in the name or the surname of the person entitled to
the estate, he can, nevertheless, obtain praetorian possession of the same.
(3) Moreover, where the name of the heir has been erased in the will at the
desire of the testator, even though it can still be read, he is not understood
to have been appointed, so that he can either enter upon the estate, or demand
praetorian possession of the same in accordance with the Civil Law.
(4) A certain man drew up his will in writing, but appointed orally a
substitute for his son, who was under the age of puberty. I gave it as my
opinion that the intention of the Praetor in granting jpossession of the estate
was that the heirs of the son and those of the father should be considered
separately. For just as praetorian posses-
sion of an estate is granted to the appointed heir of the son separately from
the heirs of the father, so it should also be given separately from the
appointed heirs of the father, where the heir is orally appointed.
9. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book II.
In order that praetorian possession of an estate may be granted in accordance
with the pupillary substitution, inquiry should be made whether the will of the
father was sealed, even though that portion containing the substitution was
produced unsealed.
10. Paulus, On Plautius, Book Vill.
When a slave is appointed an heir conditionally, there is some doubt as to
whether he can obtain praetorian possession of the estate, or not. Our Scaevola
holds that he can obtain it.
11. Papinianus, Questions, Book XIII.
&quot;Let Titius be the heir of the one of my children who shall be the last to
die before reaching the age of puberty.&quot; If the two children should die in
a very distant place, and the substitute did not know which one of them died
last, the opinion of Julianus must be adopted, which was that, on account of
the uncertainty of the condition, possession of the estate of even one who died
first could be demanded by the substitute.
(1) Where a son who was appointed heir returns from captivity after the death
of his father, he can obtain praetorian possession of his estate, and the term
of a year in which he can do so will be computed from the day of his return.
(2) Titius, after having made his will, gave himself to be arrogated, and then,
having become his own master, died. If the appointed heir should demand
praetorian possession, he will be barred by an exception on the ground of
fraud; because, by giving himself to be arrogated, the testator transferred all
his property, together with himself, to the family and household of another. It
is clear that if, having become his own master, he stated in a codicil, or in
some other document that he wished to die without changing his will, the will
which had become inoperative is understood to have been restored by this
subsequent statement, in the same way as if he had executed another will and
had torn it up, so as to leave the first one in force.
Nor should anyone think that a will can be made by the mere expression of a
wish; for, in this instance, no question whatever is raised with reference to
the legality of the instrument, but only with reference to the force of the
exception that, under these circumstances, may be filed against the plaintiff,
which must depend upon the person of the adversary.
12. Paulus, Questions, Book VII.
In order that the appointed heir may obtain praetorian possession of the estate
I think it should be required that his identity be established by a suitable
designation, so that the share to which he is entitled can be found, even if he
was appointed without any share; for when an
heir is appointed without a share he can take one which is undisposed of, or
some other portion of the estate.
If, however, the heir was designated in such a way as to seem to be excluded by
the will, because the share of the estate to which he was appointed cannot be
found, he shall not obtain praetorian possession. This occurs where anyone
appoints an heir as follows, &quot;Let Titius be my heir to the same portion of
my estate to which I have appointed him by my first will,&quot; or &quot;Let
him be my heir to the same share to which I have appointed him by my
codicil,&quot; and it should be ascertained that he was not appointed.
If, however, I should say, &quot;Let Titius be my heir if I have appointed him
heir to half of my estate in my first will,&quot; or &quot;Let him be my heir
if I have appointed him heir to half of my estate in my codicil,&quot; he can
then obtain possession of my estate, as he was appointed heir conditionally.


* 37.XII. CONCERNING PRAETORIAN POSSESSION WHERE A SON HAS BEEN MANUMITTED BY His FATHER.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XLV.
Ason who has been emancipated by his father is in the same condition, so far as
praetorian possession contrary to the provisions of the will is concerned, as
that of a freedman. This appears to the Praetor to be perfectly just, because
the son obtains the advantage of acquiring property from his father; whereas,
if he was under paternal control, and should acquire anything for himself, his
father would reap the benefit of it. Hence, the rule was established that the
father should be allowed to obtain praetorian possession contrary to the
provisions of the will, just as a patron is permitted to do.
(1) Therefore, persons who have been manumitted are enumerated in the Edict as
follows, &quot;He who had been emancipated by his father, or by his paternal
grandfather, or by his paternal great-grandfather.&quot;
(2) Where a grandson, who has been manumitted by his grandfather, gives himself
in arrogation to his father, even if he should die while still under paternal
control, or should die after having been manumitted, his grandfather will only
be admitted to the succession in accordance with the interpretation of the
Edict; because the Praetor grants the possession of the estate, just as where a
slave has been manumitted from servitude. If, however, this should be the case,
or if the son should not be arrogated because the arrogation of a freedman is
not permitted, or if it should be done fraudulently, the rights of the patron
would, nevertheless, remain unimpaired.
(3) If a father has either received money to induce him to emancipate his son,
or if, afterwards the son, during his lifetime, should pay him enough to
prevent him from opposing his will; he will be barred by an exception on the
ground of bad faith.
(4) There is another instance in which a father does not obtain ipossession of
the estate of his emancipated son, contrary to the pro-
visions of the will, and that is where the son happens to enter the army; for
the Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that the father could not, under these
circumstances, obtain possession of the estate of his emancipated son in
opposition to the terms of the will.
(5) It is settled that the children of a father, who manumitted his son, cannot
obtain possession of the estate of the latter, in opposition to the terms of
the will; even though the children of a patron can do so.
(6) Julianus says that where a father has obtained possession of the estate of
his emancipated son, in opposition to the terms of the will, he will retain the
former privilege which he enjoyed without manumission; for he should not be
prejudiced because he possessed the rights of a patron, as he is still a
father.
2. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XV.
A father is not to be considered the equal of a patron to the extent that the
Favian or Calvisian Action may be granted him, for the reason that it is unjust
for freeborn men not to have unrestricted power to alienate their property.1
3. Paulus, On Plautius, Book Vill.
Paconius says that if a son who had been emancipated and manumitted by his
father should appoint some disreputable persons his heirs (as, for instance,
prostitutes), possession of his entire estate contrary to the provisions of the
will shall be given to his father; otherwise he would be entitled to only half
of the estate, if a disreputable heir had not been appointed.
(1) If an emancipated son should pass his father over in his will, or should
appoint him his heir, the father will not be obliged to execute any trust, so
far as the share of the estate to which he is entitled is concerned, even if he
enters upon it. Where, however, a daughter or a granddaughter is manumitted,
and the father or grandfather, having been passed over in the will, demands
praetorian possession of the estate, the same rule will apply as in the case of
a son.
1 By the Roman law, a patron was entitled to the entire estate of his freedman
if he died without issue, and did not make a will; and to half of it, if he
died intestate, but left any children. If the freedman alienated his property,
he was presumed to have done so in order to defraud his patron. When a donatio
mortis causawas made, it was ipso factovoid. If the freedman died testate, the
patron could, by means of the Actio Faviana,recover any bequest which had been
made in prejudice of his rights; if he left no will, then the patron had his
remedy under the Actio Calmsiana.It was necessary to prove that the freedman
was guilty of fraud; but it was entirely immaterial whether the donee or
legatee was implicated or not, as the right of the patron was not in the least
affected by either his knowledge or ignorance of the civil condition of him
from whom he obtained the property. Estates under the value of one hundred
thousand sesterces(about $3,800) did not come within the scope of the Lex
Papia,which regulated the distribution of inheritances.
The Fabian and Calvisian Actions lay against every person, or his heirs, who
had possession of the property in question, whether he was an innocent
purchaser or not; and if it was not found, damages to its full value,
established by the oath of the plaintiff, could be recovered.ED.
4. Marcellus, Digest, Book IX.
The Praetor makes no provision in the Edict with reference to a father who has
emancipated his son, and imposed upon the latter certain conditions in
consideration of granting him freedom; and therefore the father can enter into
no valid stipulation as to any services to be rendered by his son.
5. Papinianus, Questions, Book XI.
The Divine Trajan compelled a father to emancipate his son whom he had treated
badly, and in a way contrary to that dictated by paternal affection, and the
son, having afterwards died, the father declared that he was entitled to the
possession of his estate on account of having manumitted him. This, however,
was refused him on the advice of Neratius Priscus and Aristo as the
emancipation took place through necessity, because of the want of paternal
affection.


* 37.XIII. CONCERNING PRAETORIAN POSSESSION OF AN ESTATE IN THE CASE OP THE WILL OP A SOLDIER.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XLV.
There is no doubt that the wishes of those who make their last wills while in
arms against the enemy, no matter in what way they may do so, and who die while
in the army, should be observed. For, although the condition of a soldier is
different from that of those persons who are privileged by the Imperial
Constitutions, still, as men who constantly go into battle are exposed to the
same dangers, it is only reasonable that they should claim the same privileges
for themselves. Therefore, all who are in such a position that they cannot make
wills under military law, if they are found in the train of the army and die
there, can execute wills in whatever way they desire, and in whatever way they
may be able, whether they are governors of provinces, Imperial deputies, or any
others who are incapable of testation in accordance with military law.
(1) Moreover, there is no doubt that the captains of ships and the commanders
of triremes can make wills under military law. All the oarsmen and sailors of
fleets are considered as soldiers, and also the guards are classed as such; and
there is no doubt that all these are capable of testation in accordance with
military law.
(2) If a soldier is transferred from one command to another, even though he may
have left one and not yet have been enrolled in another, he can, nevertheless,
make a will according to military law; for he is still a soldier, although he
may not yet have been assigned to any particular legion.


* 37.XIV. CONCERNING THE RIGHT OP PATRONAGE.

1. Ulpianus, On the Office of Proconsul, Book IX.
Governors should hear the complaints of patrons against their freedmen, and
their cases should be tried without delay; for if a freedman is ungrateful, he
should not go unpunished. Where, however, the freedman fails in the duty which
he owes to his patron, his patroness, or their children, he should only be
punished lightly, with a warning that a more severe penalty will be imposed if
he again gives cause for complaint, and then be dismissed. But if he is guilty
of insult or abuse of his patrons, he should be sent into temporary exile. If.
he offers them personal violence, he must be sentenced to the mines.
The same rule will apply where he has caused them annoyance by means of a
vexatious lawsuit, or suborned an informer against them, or has attempted to
make some accusation against them.
2. The Same, Opinions, Book I.
Freedmen should not be forbidden by their patrons to transact lawful business.
3. Marcianus, Institutes, Book II.
Where anyone is appointed a testamentary guardian, and a female slave is
bequeathed to him, and he is asked to manumit her, and, after doing so, he
receives a legacy and excuses himself from accepting the guardianship of the
minor, the Divine Severus and Antoninus stated in a Rescript that while he was,
in fact, a patron of the slave, he should be deprived of all the rights
attaching to the condition of patronage.
4. The Same, Institutes, Book V.
The Emperors Severus and Antoninus very properly stated in a Rescript that the
rights over freedmen are preserved for children, where their father has been
convicted of treason; just as such rights are preserved for the children of
those who are punished for any other cause.
5. The Same, Institutes, Book XIII.
The Divine Claudius ordered that a freedman who had been proved to have
instigated informers to raise a question as to the civil status of his patron
should again become the patron's slave.
(1) It is provided by a Rescript of our Emperor that if a patron does not
support his freedman, he shall forfeit his right of patronage.
6. Paulus, On the Lex ^Elia Sentia, Book II.
He who permits his freedman to swear that he will not marry, or have any
children, is understood to be in the same position as one who compels his
freedwoman to swear that she will not marry, or have any
children. If, however, his son should do this, without his father's knowledge,
or if he should enter into a stipulation with the freedman, this will not
prejudice him in any way; but if a son who is under the control of his father
should do so by his order, it is clear that he will be liable under the above-
mentioned law.
(1) A patron stipulated for a hundred days of labor to be performed, or five
aureito be paid for each day by his freedman. This agreement does not seem to
be contrary to law, because the freedman has the power to perform the labor.
(2) Although no person is excepted by this law, still it should be understood
only to refer to those who can have children. Hence, if anyone should compel a
freedman who has been castrated to take such an oath, it must be said that he
cannot be held liable under this law.
(3) If a patron should compel his freed woman to swear to marry him, and he
does so with the intention of marrying her, he will not be considered to have
done anything illegal. If, however, the patron should not marry her, and only
required her to take the oath to prevent her from marrying another, Julianus
says that he has committed a fraud against the law, and that he should be
liable, just as if he had compelled his f reedwoman to swear not to marry at
all.
(4) An oath is permitted by the Lex Juliarelating to marriages of different
orders, which, in this instance, is imposed upon a freedman or a freedwoman,
not to marry, provided they desire to contract a legal marriage.
7. Modestinus, On Manumissions.
The Divine Vespasian decreed if a female slave had been sold under this law
upon condition that she should not be prostituted, and she should be
prostituted, that she would become free; and that if she afterwards came into
the possession of another purchaser, without this condition, that she should be
free by virtue of the sale, and become the freedwoman of the former vendor.
(1) It is provided by the Decrees of the Emperors that the governors of
provinces, who have jurisdiction over the complaints of patrons, should impose
penalties upon their freedmen in proportion to the gravity of their offences.
These penalties are sometimes required in the case of an ungrateful freedman,
and he is either deprived of a part of his property which is given to his
patron, or he is scourged with whips, and then discharged.
8. The Same, Rules, Book VI.
The Divine Hadrian stated in a Rescript that where a slave was manumitted by a
son under paternal control, who was a soldier, he became the freedman of the
soldier and not of his father.
(1) A slave who is not manumitted will obtain his freedom when he is sold under
the condition that he be manumitted within a certain time; and, after the time
has elapsed, he will become the freedman of the purchaser, even though he may
not have been manumitted.
9. The Same, Rules, Book IX.
Sons who refuse to accept the estates of their fathers do not lose their rights
over the freedmen of the latter.
The same rule applies to an emancipated son.
(1) Some masters, who do not retain their rights as patrons over the property
of their freedmen, are excepted by the law, as in the case of one who has been
condemned to death, and has not been restored to his civil rights; or one who
has been the informer of a crime committed by his freedman; or where a son,
over twenty-five years of age, has accused a freedman belonging to his father
of a capital crime.
10. Terentius Clemens, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book IX.
It has been decided that a patron who has accused his freedman of a capital
crime is excluded from praetorian possession of his estate contrary to the
provisions of the will. Labeo thinks that the accusation of a capital crime
should include both those which involve the penalty of death, and those
punished by exile. An accuser is understood to be one who gave the name of the
alleged guilty person, unless he asks that he receive immunity. Servilius says
that this was also the opinion of Proculus.
11. Ulpianus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book X.
Moreover, he will not be admitted to the succession of his intestate freedman
which is granted him by the Law of the Twelve Tables.
12. Modestinus, Opinions, Book I.
Gaius Seius, having died after making his will, appointed his freedman Julius,
together with his sons, heir to part of his estate, just as if he had been his
own child. I ask whether an appointment of this kind can change the civil
condition of the freedman. Modestinus gave it as his opinion that it would not
change his condition.
13. The Same, Pandects, Book I.
A son under paternal control cannot manumit a slave who is part of his
peculium,unless he does so by order of his father; and the slave, after having
been manumitted, becomes the freedman of the father.
14. Ulpianus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book V.
If I should swear in court that I am the patron of a certain slave, it must be
held that I am not entitled to his estate in that capacity, because an oath
does not constitute a patron. The case would, however, be different, if it had
been judicially decided that I was his patron, for then the judgment will
stand.
15. Paulus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book Vill.
Anyone who compels his freedman to be sworn contrary to the Lex ^Slia
Sentiawill neither himself nor his children have any rights over the freedman.
16. Ulpianus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book X.
When a freedman commits a fraud against the law, in order that he may die worth
less than a hundred thousand sesterces,his act is void by operation of law; and
therefore his patron will succeed him as a freedman possessed an estate of that
amount. Hence, everything which he has alienated, for any reason whatsoever,
will be of no force or effect.
It is evident that if he should alienate any property for the purpose of
defrauding his patron, and, after doing so, he should remain worth more than a
hundred thousand sesterces,the alienation will be valid, but any property which
was fraudulently disposed of can be recovered by the Favian or the Calvisian
action. Julianus has frequently stated this, and it is our practice. The reason
for this difference is that whenever an alienation of anything is made for the
purpose of defrauding the law the act is void.
Moreover, he is guilty of fraud who diminishes the value of his estate to less
than a hundred thousand sestercesfor the purpose of evading the provisions of
the law. But if, after the alienation has taken place, he still remains the
owner of property worth a hundred thousand sesterces,he is not considered to
have committed a fraud against the law, but only against his patron; and
therefore the property which he has disposed of can be recovered by either the
Favian or the Calvisian Action.
(1) Where anyone, for the purpose of diminishing the value of his property to
an amount under a hundred thousand sesterces,alienates several articles at
once, so that by revoking the sale of one, or of portions of all of them, he
will be worth more than a hundred thousand sesterces,will it be necessary for
us to revoke the sale of all the articles, or that of each one pro rata,in
order to render his fortune equal to a hundred thousand sesterces?The better
opinion is that the alienation of all the articles is of no force or effect.
(2) If anyone should not sell all of his property at once, but a part of it at
one time, and a part of it at another, the subsequent alienation will not be
revoked by operation of law, but the former one will be; and there will be
ground for the institution of the Favian Action with reference to the property
last disposed of.
17. The Same, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book XI.
The Divine Brothers stated the following in a Rescript: &quot;We have
ascertained from those who are the most learned in the law that it was
sometimes doubtful whether a grandson could demand praetorian possession of the
estate of his grandfather contrary to the provisions of the will, if his
father, who was over twenty-five years of age, had accused him of a capital
crime.
&quot;It is true that Proculus, a jurist of great authority, was of the opinion
that, in a case of this kind, praetorian possession should not be given to the
grandson; and we adopted this opinion when we issued a Rescript in answer to
the application of Csesidia Longina. But, our friend Volusius Maecianus,
Praetor of the Civil Law, and one who
pays the greatest attention to old and well-founded precedents, being
influenced by his respect for Our Rescript (as he stated to Us) did not think
that he could decide otherwise. But as We have discussed this point very fully
with Maecianus himself, and with others of our friends learned in the law, the
better opinion seems to be that a grandson will not be excluded from the estate
of his freedman's grandfather, either by the words or the spirit of the law, or
by the Edict of the Praetor, or on his own account, or by the stigma attaching
to his father.
&quot;We are also aware that this opinion has been adopted by many eminent
jurists, as well as by that most illustrious man Salvius Julianus, our
friend.&quot;
(1) The question also arose, if a son accused the freedman of his father of a
capital offence, whether this would prejudice the rights of his children.
Proculus held that the stigma attaching to the son of the patron would
prejudice his children. Julianus, however, denies that this is the case; and it
must be held that the opinion of Julianus should be adopted.
18. Scasvola, Opinions, Book IV.
I ask whether a freedman can be prevented by his patron from carrying on the
same kind of business which his patron is transacting in the same colony.
Scaevola answered that he could not be prevented from doing so.
19. Paulus, Sentences, Book I.
A freedman is ungrateful when he does not show proper respect for his patron,
or refuses to manage his property, or undertake the guardianship of his
children.
20. The Same, Sentences, Book III.
Where a freedman dies after making his will, power is given to his patron to
demand either payment of whatever was due for granting him his freedom, or
praetorian possession of a part of his estate; and even if the freedman sho'uld
die intestate, the patron will still have the choice of these two things.
21. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book HI.
If the patron or the freedman has been banished, and afterwards restored to his
civil condition, the right of patronage, as well as that to demand praetorian
possession contrary to the provisions of the will, which have been lost, will
be restored; and this right is preserved, even if the patron or the freedman
should be restored to his former status after having been sentenced to the
mines.
(1) A patron is excluded from praetorian possession contrary to the provisions
of the will when he is appointed heir to only a twelfth of the estate; and what
is necessary to make up the amount to which he is entitled can be obtained
through his slave by a bequest of the freedman payable unconditionally, and
without delay, either by leav-
ing him the estate, or a legacy, or a sum of money payable under a trust.
(2) Where only one of two patrons is appointed heir to what is due to him
unconditionally, and without delay, he cannot demand praetorian possession in
opposition to the provisions of the will; even if a smaller amount than he was
entitled to has been left to him, and he should demand praetorian possession of
the estate contrary to the provisions of the will, the share of the other
patron will accrue to him.
(3) If the natural children of a freedman, who had been disinherited by him,
should through their slaves succeed to a share of the estate of their father, a
stranger having been appointed heir to the remainder, this will affect the
right of the patron.
(4) Where the son of a freedman is appointed his heir, and rejects the estate,
the patron will not be excluded.
22. Gaius, On Special Cases.
It is well established that even if the son of a patroness is under parental
control, the estate will still belong to him by law.
23. Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book XV.
When a son left the death of a father unavenged, and a slave having detected
the murderer, had deserved his freedom on this account, I held that the son
should not be considered as the patron of the slave, for the reason that he was
unworthy.
(1) Where a false codicil had been made, which at first was considered to be
genuine, and the heir, ignorant of the fact, granted freedom to certain slaves
by virtue of a trust created by said codicil, it was stated in a Rescript of
the Divine Hadrian that the slaves would be free, but that they must pay the
heir their full value. And it was justly held that the said slaves should
become the manumitted freedmen of the heir, for the reason that his right over
them as patron still remained in force.
24. Paulus, In the First of the Six Books of the Imperial Decrees Rendered in
Council; or the Imperial Decisions.
Camelia Pia appealed from the decision of Hermogenes, which set forth that the
judge who had jurisdiction over an estate to be divided between herself and her
co-heir had divided not only the property, but the freedmen as well. It was
decided that this had not been done in accordance with any law, and that the
division of the freedmen was void; but that the appointment of the provisions
made by the judge among the co-heirs should be confirmed without any
alteration.


* 37.XV. CONCERNING THE RESPECT WHICH SHOULD BE SHOWN TO PARENTS AND PATRONS.

1. Ulpianus, Opinions, Book I.
The filial affection due to parents should also be manifested by soldiers.
Wherefore, if a son, who is a soldier, commits any improper act towards his
father, he must be punished in proportion to his offence.
(1) Filial affection between a mother and a son who have been liberated from
slavery together should be maintained in accordance with natural law.
(2) If a son, by the use of abusive language, should insult his father or his
mother, whom it is his duty to respect, or should lay impious hands upon either
of them, the Prefect of the City shall punish the crime, which affects public
order, in proportion to its gravity.
(3) A son should be considered as unworthy to be a soldier, who calls his
father and his mother, by whom he acknowledges that he has been brought up,
malefactors.
2. Julianus, Digest, Book XIV.
The respect due to parents and patrons is of such a character that an action
for fraud or injury can not be granted against them, even though they may
appear by an attorney; for although, by the terms of the Edict, if judgment be
rendered against them, they might not be considered infamous; still, according
to public opinion itself, they will not escape the imputation of infamy through
the very proceeding.
(1) Judgment for forcible possession is also forbidden to be rendered against
them.
3. Marcellus, Opinions.
Titius purchased a boy slave, and after the lapse of several years ordered him
to be sold, but subsequently having been begged to manumit him, did so, having
received from him a sum of money as his value. I ask whether the son and heir
of the master who manumitted him can accuse the freedman of being ungrateful.
The answer was that he could, if there was no other obstacle; for it makes a
great deal of difference where anyone has given freedom to his slave in
consideration of money obtained from him, or from a friend of his, and where a
slave, who had belonged to another, becomes his property and pays him a sum of
money for his freedom. For the former confers a benefit upon him, although it
is not gratuitous; the latter, however, can be considered to have done nothing
more than to have lent him his aid.
4. Marcianus, Public Decisions, Book II.
The Divine Severus and Antoninus stated in a Rescript that an ungrateful
freedman could be accused by the agent of his patron.
5. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book X.
A parent, a patron, a patroness, or the children of relatives of the latter,
will not be liable to an action in factumon account of a transaction, in which
they are said to have received a sum of money, in consideration of either the
performance or nonperformance of some act.
(1) Neither will actions implying moral turpitude, nor such as are based upon
bad faith, or fraud, be granted against them.
6. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XL
Nor can suit be brought against them for corrupting a slave:
7. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book X.
Although such actions may not imply moral turpitude.
(1) And judgment shall be rendered against them only for the amount which they
are able to pay.
(2) Nor can they be opposed by exceptions on the ground of bad faith, or for
force, or fear, or by interdicts unde vi,or for any injury suffered through
violence.
(3) When these persons tender an oath, they are not compelled to swear that
this is not done maliciously.
(4) When a freedman alleges that his patroness has fraudulently been placed in
possession of an estate in the name of her unborn child, he shall not be heard,
because he cannot accuse his patroness of fraud, for such persons are entitled
to respect; as is stated in the Sections of the Edict.
(5) Respect, however, is only due to them personally, and not to those who
represent them; but if they themselves should appear for others, they will
still be entitled to respect.
8. Paulus, On the Edict, Book X.
The heir of a freedman is entitled to all the rights of a stranger against the
patron of the deceased.
9. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXVL
The persons of a father and a patron should always appear honorable and sacred
in the eyes of a freedman and a son.
10. Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book XVII.
A father has no right to place any obligation upon his emancipated son, in
consideration of having granted him his freedom, for the reason that nothing of
this kind can be imposed upon children. Nor can anyone say that a son is bound
by an oath to his father, who manumits him, in the same way as a freedman is to
his patron, as children owe their parents affection and not menial services.
11. Papinianus, Opinions, Book XIII.
A freedwoman is not considered ungrateful because she works at her trade in
opposition to the wishes of her patron.
