# -*- mode: org -*-

THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS. BOOK XXIX.
TITLE I.
CONCERNING THE WILL OF A SOLDIER. 1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XLV.
The Divine Julius Caesar was the first who granted to soldiers free power to
make a will, but this concession was only temporary. The first after him to
confer this power was the Divine Titus, and then Domitianus. The Divine Nerva
subsequently conceded the greatest indulgence to soldiers in this respect, and
Trajanus followed his example. From that time forward there was inserted in the
Imperial Edicts the following provision: "It has come to my notice that wills
executed by our fellow-soldiers have been frequently presented which would be
the subject of dispute if the laws were strictly applied and enforced; so, in
accordance with the benevolent promptings of my mind with reference to my
excellent and most faithful fellow-soldiers, I have thought that
indulgence should be extended to their inexperience, so that no matter in what
way they may draw up their wills, they shall be confirmed. Let them, therefore,
draw them up in whatever form they desire, in the best way that they can, and
the mere wish of the testators will be sufficient for the distribution of their
estates."
(1) The term "soldier" is understood to have been derived from militia, that is
to say duritia, the hardships which soldiers endure for us, or from the word
"multitude," or from the term "evil," from which soldiers are accustomed to
protect us; or from the one thousand men from the Greek tanma, for the Greeks
designate a thousand men assembled together by that term, each one being called
the thousandth of the entire number, whence the leader himself is styled
ciliarcoV. The word exercitus (army) derives its name from exercise.
2. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XV.
The Praetor issued a separate Edict with reference to the wills of soldiers, for
the reason that he was well aware that, according to the Constitutions of the
Emperors, peculiar and extraordinary rights have been established with
reference to their wills.
3. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book II.
If a soldier who intended to make his will in compliance with the ordinary law
should die before having it witnessed: Pomponius is in doubt as to its
validity. But why should he not approve of a will thus made by a soldier
without observing the ordinary formalities? Is it because he thinks that a
soldier who intended to execute his will, in accordance with the ordinary law,
by doing so renounced his military privilege? Can it be believed that anyone
would select a certain way to make his will for the purpose of rendering it
void; and is it not more probable that he would prefer to make use of both ways
in the execution of his will, on account of the accidents to which he was
exposed; just as civilians, when they draw up their wills, are accustomed to
add that they desire that they shall be valid at least as codicils; and in this
instance would anyone say that if the will is imperfect it should stand as a
codicil? The Divine Marcus stated in a Rescript an opinion which coincides with
our own.
4. The Same, On Sabinus, Book I.
It is established that a person who is deaf or dumb can make a military will
while in the army, and before having been discharged on account of his
affliction.
5. The Same, On Sabinus, Book IV.
Soldiers can make a substitution for their heirs, but only with reference to
such property as they have acquired by their wills.
6. The Same, On Sabinus, Book V.
Where a soldier appoints a sole heir to a certain tract of land, he is held to
have died intestate so far as the remainder of his patrimony is concerned. For
a soldier can die partly testate and partly intestate.
7. The Same, On Sabinus, Book IX.
Where a will is executed in accordance with military law, even though the
testator may be ignorant that his wife was pregnant, or, being aware of the
fact, he does this with the intention that if a child should be born to him, it
shall be disinherited, the will is not broken.
8. Marcellus, Digest, Book X.
The same rule applies where a soldier arrogates a son, or his grandson obtains
the succession in the place of his son.
9. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book IX.
The same rule must be said to apply where a soldier who had a son born to him
in his lifetime preferred to die without making any alteration to his will;
for, in accordance with military law, he is held to have renewed his will.
(1) This was stated in a Rescript by the Divine Pius with reference to a man
who executed a will while he was a civilian, and afterwards became a soldier;
for this will was valid by military law, if such was the desire of the soldier.
10. The Same, On Sabinus, Book IV.
Anyone who is in the power of the enemy cannot make a will, even in compliance
with military law.
11. The Same, On the Edict, Book XLV.
Those who are condemned to death for some military crime can only make a will
disposing of property obtained during their service; but the question arises,
can they do so by military, or by civil law? The better opinion is, that they
can make a will in accordance with military law; for, as the right of testation
is conferred upon a man because of his being a soldier, it must be held that it
follows that he can exercise it by reason of his military privilege. This
should, however, be understood to apply to cases where he has not violated his
oath.
(1) Where a soldier is in doubt whether or not he is his own master, and makes
a will, he is in such a position that it will be valid in any event. For if he
should execute a will, being uncertain as to whether or not his father is
living, it will be valid.
(2) Where a son under paternal control, not knowing that his father is dead,
makes a will disposing of his castrense peculium while in the service, the
estate of his father will not belong to the heir, but only such property as the
son has acquired during the time when he was a soldier.
12. Papinianus, Opinions, Book VI.
Soldiers only leave by will such property as they own.
13. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XLV.
The same rule applies where a soldier has determined to change his will, not
because he desired to deprive the heir he appointed of his
property acquired in the service, but in order to make a will disposing of his
father's estate, and to appoint another heir.
(1) If, however, the soldier should die after having been discharged, his
entire estate, including that derived from his father, will belong to the heir
of the peculium castrense; as Marcellus says in the Eleventh Book of the
Digest. For one who is no longer in the army can not dispose of only a portion
of his property by will.
(2) Persons who have been deported, and almost all those who have not
testamentary capacity, can be appointed heirs by a soldier. If, however, he
should appoint as his heir someone who had become a penal slave, the
appointment will not be valid. But if, at the time of the death of the
testator, the heir should be in the possession of his citizenship, the
appointment will begin to take effect, just as if the estate had just been
bequeathed. And, in general, it may be said, in every instance in which a
soldier appoints his heir, that the appointment will begin to acquire validity,
if at the time of the death of the testator, the party was in such a condition
that he could be appointed the heir of a soldier.
(3) Where a soldier appoints as his heir his own slave, whom he believed to be
free, without granting him his freedom, the appointment
will not be valid.
(4) Where a soldier by his will granted freedom to his slave, and left him his
estate in trust, charging the first heir and the substitute with its delivery,
even though the first heir and the substitute should die before entering upon
the estate, the deceased will not die intestate, as our Emperor and the Divine
Severus stated in a Rescript; but it should be held that the case resembled one
where his freedom and the estate had been directly given to the said slave; and
it cannot be denied that it was the intention of the testator that he should
obtain both.
14. Marcianus, Trusts, Book IV.
A discussion arose as to whether the same indulgence should be granted with
reference to the wills of civilians. It was established that in this instance
there was a distinction, for if the parties should die during the lifetime of
the testator, and he be aware of the fact, there was no necessity for anything
new, but where he was not aware of it, relief must, by all means, be granted
after his death.
15. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XLV.
A soldier cannot appoint more than one necessary heir, where it is evident that
this is done in order to defraud his creditors.
(1) Just as a soldier can dispose of his estate by merely stating his wish, so
he can take it away. Hence, if he cancels or tears his will, the latter will be
of no force or effect. If, however, he should cancel his will, and afterwards
wish it to be valid, it will be valid through this last expression of his
desire. Therefore, where a soldier, having erased his will, afterwards sealed
it with his ring, the court having jurisdiction of the case must take into
consideration the intention of the testator in doing this; for if it should be
proved that he repented of changing his
mind, the will will be understood to have been renewed. If, however, he has
done this with the intention that what was written in the will should not be
read, he will be held to have done so for the purpose of cancelling his will.
(2) The Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that a will executed by a soldier
before entering the army is valid by military law, provided the testator died
in the service, and did not change his mind afterwards.
(3) Where anyone who draws up the will of a soldier inserts his own name as
heir therein, he will not be released from the penalty prescribed by the Decree
of the Senate.
(4) A soldier can appoint an heir for a certain time, and another after that
time, or he can appoint one on the fulfillment of a certain condition, or
another after the condition has been complied with.
(5) He can also, by military law, execute a will not only for himself but also
for his son, and he can do this for his son alone, even though he does not
execute one for himself, and such a will is valid if the father should die in
the service, or within a year after his discharge.
(6) Papinianus, in the Fourteenth Book of Questions, states that application
for the possession of the property of an estate cannot be made after the time
prescribed by the Edict, because this provision is a general one.
16. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XLIII.
If a soldier should bequeath a dotal estate to anyone, the legacy will not be
valid, according to the Lex Julia.
17. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XV.
Where a soldier appoints heirs to certain property, as for instance, one to
certain property in a city, another to certain lands in the country, and still
another to other property, the appointments will be valid, for it will be
considered just as if he had appointed the said heirs without assigning them
their shares in the estate, and that he had distributed all his property
through making his bequest to each one by preference.
(1) Julian also says that where a testator appoints one heir to his property
obtained while a soldier, and another the heir to the remainder of the estate,
this is to be understood to be the disposal of two distinct estates belonging,
as it were, to two different men, so that that heir alone who was appointed for
the property obtained while in the service shall be liable for debts incurred
by the soldier while in the army, and he alone who was appointed heir to the
remainder of the estate shall be bound to pay any debts contracted outside of
the service. In this instance it seems to be proper to hold that where anything
is due to the soldier from any source, it will be due by operation of law to
either the former or the latter heir. If, however, either of the shares of the
property should not be sufficient to pay the debts for which it is liable, and
for this reason the party appointed heir to this share does not accept it, the
other who did accept must be compelled either to take up the defence of the
entire estate, or to pay the creditors in full.
(2) Where, in the same will, a soldier appoints a certain person his heir, and
afterwards disinherits him, he will be held to have been deprived of the
estate, while by the will of a civilian, an estate cannot be taken away by a
mere disinheritance of this kind.
(3) If a father should be appointed heir to the castrense peculium by his son
under paternal control, who is serving in the army, and he fails to take
advantage of the will, and has some of the property in possession, or
fraudulently relinquished it to avoid having possession, an action will be
granted to the legatee against him.
(4) If a soldier should make a will while he is in the army, and a codicil
after his term of service has expired, and he dies within a year of his
discharge, it is held by many authorities that the codicil should be considered
to have been made in accordance with the rule of the Civil Law; because it was
not executed by a soldier, and it should not be held that it is confirmed by
the will. Therefore there is no room for the application of the Falcidian Law
in the case of any legacies bequeathed by the will, but this law is applicable
to such legacies as are included in the codicil.
18. Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book XVIII.
Where, however, the legacies granted by the will, as well as those granted by
the codicil, taken together, amount to more than three-fourths of the estate,
the question arises as to what extent should those to which the Falcidian Law
applies be diminished. It would be most convenient, however, for it to be
decided that the legacies which the soldier bequeathed by his will, having been
fully paid out of the assets of the entire estate, the remainder should be
divided between the heirs and those to whom legacies were given by the codicil,
in the proportion of three-fourths to the former, and one-fourth to the latter.
(1) But what if the legacies bequeathed by the will should absorb the entire
amount of the estate, would those to whom property was left by the codicil be
entitled to anything, or would they not? Since, if the soldier had made these
bequests while still in the service, all would be liable to contribution, and
that portion which he bequeathed in excess of his estate must be deducted pro
rata from all the legacies, the same must also be done in this instance. Then,
the amount of the legacies bequeathed by the codicil having been ascertained
from the sum which is found to be due (where the legacies belong to the same
class) the heir can then deduct his fourth from those legacies alone which were
bequeathed by the codicil.
(2) If, however, all the legacies had been included in the computation, and
what remains in the hands of the heir should not be sufficient to make up the
fourth of his share of said legacies, whatever is lacking must be taken from
those legacies alone which were bequeathed by the codicil.
19. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book IV.
The question arose, where a soldier having already made one will makes a
second, and in the latter charges his heir as trustee to carry
out the provisions of the first, what would be the rule of law in this case? I
said, "A soldier is permitted to make several wills, but whether he makes them
all at once or separately, they will be valid only where the testator expressly
stated that he desired this to be the case; nor will the first will be annulled
by the last, as he can appoint an heir to a portion of his estate, that is to
say, he can die partly testate and partly intestate.
Again, if he had, in the first place, made a codicil, he can arrange it by
providing in the will which follows that the codicil can have the effect of an
appointment, and can render a direct appointment effective which was formerly
precarious; hence, I will say that, in the case stated, if the soldier had
intended that the will first executed should be valid, what he provided must
stand, and the consequence is that there will be two wills. However, where the
execution of the first will is committed to the heir as trustee, it is evident
that he did not intend that it should be valid by operation of law, but rather
through the acts of the trustee, that is to say, that he has converted the
effect of the first will into that of a trust and a codicil.
(1) The question, however, arises, whether the entire will is converted into a
codicil, that is to say, whether the appointment of the heir is included, or in
fact only the legacies, the trusts, and the grants of freedom. It seems to me
that not only the other matters, with the exception of the appointment of the
heir, but also the appointment itself is included in the trust, unless it is
proved that the intention of the testator was otherwise.
(2) Where anyone has been appointed by a soldier heir for a certain time, and
another person an heir for the ensuing time, the question arises whether the
last heir should be responsible for the distribution of the legacies not
distributed by the first one. I think that this obligation does not rest upon
him, unless it is established that the soldier's intention was different.
20. Julianus, Digest, Book XXVII.
A military tribune made a codicil while in camp, after his successor arrived,
and then died. As he ceased to occupy the position of a soldier after his
successor had arrived in the camp, his codicil must be considered as having
been executed under the common law governing Roman citizens.
(1) Where anyone, after executing a will, enters the military service, this
will is also considered that of a soldier, under certain circumstances; as, for
instance, if he opened the will and read it, and sealed it a second time with
his seal; and still more so, if he erased part of it, defaced it, or made any
additions to, or corrections in it. If, however, none of these things took
place, his will will not enjoy any of the privileges attaching to the testament
of a soldier.
21. Africanus, Questions, Book IV.
The decision that a will executed during military service is also valid for a
year after the discharge of the testator from the army seems
by its terms to show that this privilege can only be enjoyed by those who are
regularly discharged. Hence, neither prefects, tribunes, or other officers who
cease to serve when their successors arrive will be entitled to it.
22. Marcianus, Institutes, Book IV.
Where a son under paternal control, who is serving as a soldier, loses his
civil rights, or is emancipated, or is given in adoption by his father, his
will will be valid, just as if a new one had been executed.
23. Tertullianus, On the Castrense Peculium.
The same rule applies where the head of a household, while a soldier, only
disposes of his peculium castrense by will, and subsequently gives himself to
be arrogated. If, however, he should do this after having been already
discharged, his testament will not be valid.
24. Florentinus, Institutes, Book X.
The Divine Trajanus stated in a Rescript addressed to Statilius Severus that:
"The privilege accorded to persons serving in the army which imparts validity
to their wills, no matter how they have been executed, must be understood as
follows, namely, in the first place, it must be established that the will was
executed, which can be done without committing it to writing, which also
applies to others who are not soldiers. Therefore, where a soldier, with
reference to whose estate application has been made to you, has called together
persons to witness his will, and declared in their presence whom he desired to
be his heir, and to what slave he wished to grant freedom, it may be held that
he, in this way, made a will without reducing it to writing, and his wishes
must be carried into effect.
If, however (as frequently happens), he should say to someone: "I constitute
you my heir, or I leave you my property"; this must not be regarded as a will.
Nor does it make any more difference to others than those to whom this
privilege is granted, that such a disposition of property should not be
allowed; for otherwise, it would not be difficult for witnesses to be found
after the death of a soldier, who would assert that they had heard the latter
say that he left his property to those whom they desired to benefit, and in
this way the wills of soldiers would be overthrown."
25. Marcellus, Opinions.
Titius, before he became a legionary tribune, made a will, and after obtaining
the office died, without having altered it. I ask whether such a will should be
considered a military one. Marcellus answers, The will which he made before
becoming tribune would be subject to the rules of the Common Law, unless after
it had been executed, it is proved that the testator declared that he wished it
to be valid. For, by the Imperial Constitutions, not the wills of soldiers, but
wills made by soldiers while in the army, are confirmed. It is evident,
however, that a soldier should be understood to have made a will, who declares
in any
way whatsoever that he desires that a previous will which he had executed
should be valid.
26. Macer, Military Wills, Book II.
The wills of soldiers who have been dishonorably discharged immediately cease
to be valid by military law; but the privilege is extended for the term of a
year to the wills of those who have obtained an honorable discharge, or one for
some good reason.
(1) The right to dispose of castrense peculium by will, which is granted to
sons under paternal control, serving in the army, is not conceded to such as
are dishonorably discharged, because this privilege is only bestowed by way of
recompense upon others who deserve it.
27. Papinianus, Opinions, Book VI.
A centurion, by a second will, appointed his posthumous children his heirs, but
did not appoint any substitutes for them; and, as none were mentioned, stated
that reference should be had to his first will. It was held that everything
included in the second will was void, except the appointment of the posthumous
heirs; unless, after having referred to his first will, he expressly confirmed
all that was contained in the second.
28. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXVI.
Where a son under paternal control died while in the army, after having
appointed as his heir his son, who had not yet reached the age of puberty, and
also appointed a substitute as well as guardians for him while under the
control of his grandfather, the Divine Brothers stated in a Rescript that the
substitution was valid, but that the appointment of the guardians was not, for
the reason that a soldier in disposing of his estate can make any substitution
that he desires, but he cannot do anything injuriously affecting the rights of
another.
29. Marcellus, Digest, Book X.
If an heir appointed by a soldier should voluntarily accept an estate, and,
having been requested to do so, surrenders the whole of it, the rights of
action arising out of the Trebellian Decree of the Senate are transferred.
(1) Where a soldier by his will manumits a slave whose freedom is not allowed
to be granted by the Lex Ælia Sentia, or any other law, his act is void.
(2) The Edict of the Praetor, by which appointed heirs as well as legatees are
excused from taking an oath, is also applicable to the wills of soldiers, just
as in the case of trusts. The same rule applies where a condition is
dishonorable.
(3) It is established that praetorian possession of the share of the estate to
which he was entitled should be granted to a father who had personally
emancipated his son, this being done in opposition to the provisions of the
latter's will, except with reference to such property as the son had acquired
while in the service, and which he was free to dispose of testamentarily.
30. Paulus, Questions, Book VII.
For the Divine Pius Antoninus stated in a Rescript that praetorian possession of
the estate of a son serving as a soldier should not be granted in violation of
the will of the latter, so far as property obtained while in the army was
concerned.
31. Marcellus, Digest, Book XIII.
Where a soldier bequeathed a slave to Titius and Seius, and while Seius was
deliberating as to whether he would accept the bequest or not, Titius
manumitted the slave, and Seius afterwards declined the legacy, I say that the
slave should be free, for the reason that if an heir manumits a slave
bequeathed to anyone, and the legatee afterwards rejects the bequest, the slave
will become free.
32. Modestinus, Rules, Book IX.
Where the estate of a soldier is not entered upon in accordance with the
evident desire of the testator, the heirs will not be entitled to his property
acquired while in the service.
33. Tertyllianus, On the Castrense Peculium.
Where a son under paternal control, while in the army, makes a will according
to military custom, and subsequently, after the death of his father, a
posthumous child is born to him, his will is broken. If, however, he is still
of the same mind, and wishes the said will to continue to be valid, he can
render it so, just as if he had made another; provided he was serving as a
soldier up to the time when the posthumous child was born.
(1) Where, however, a son under paternal control, who is serving as a soldier,
makes a will, and then afterwards, during his lifetime, and during that of his
grandfather, a posthumous child is born to him, his will will not be broken,
because the said child will not come under his control, and is not held to be
born a proper heir.1 Nor indeed, can this posthumous grandchild, since it was
born during the lifetime of the son, become at once a proper heir to its
grandfather, and therefore the will of the grandfather is not broken; as,
although it at once comes under the control of its grandfather, the son will,
nevertheless, be entitled to priority.
(2) It follows that if a son under paternal control makes a will while serving
as a soldier, and through mistake, and not because he wished to disinherit him,
omits to mention a posthumous child; and if the said posthumous child should be
born after the death of his grandfather, but during the lifetime of the son,
that is to say his own father, his testament will certainly be broken.
If, however, it should be born after its father has become a civilian, the
validity of the testament which has been broken will not be re-
1 The word posthumous was not used by the Romans solely to denote a child born
after its father's death, as is the case at present; it was also applicable to
one born during his lifetime, after the execution of his will. If this is not
remembered, the statement in the text will appear to be a contradiction in
terms. --- ED.
stored. But if it should be born while its father is still in the army, then,
if the latter should desire the will to be valid, it will become so, just as if
it had been executed a second time.
(3) If, however, a posthumous child should be born during the lifetime of its
grandfather, this will not at once break the will of the father, but only where
it survives its grandfather, while its father is still living, as it now for
the first time becomes the heir of the latter. For this is the case because it
never can break two wills at once, that is to say, those of its father and its
grandfather.
34. Paulus, Questions, Book XIV.
The Divine Hadrian stated in a Rescript that the will of a soldier who
preferred to die rather than to suffer pain, or the annoyances of life, was
valid, and that his estate could be claimed by those entitled to it by law if
he died intestate.
(1) A soldier who had been discharged began a will within the year but was
unable to finish it. It can be said that, by this act, the will which he
executed while in the army was rendered void, if it was drawn up in accordance
with military law; otherwise it would not be legally rescinded if it was valid
at Common Law.
(2) This distinction does not apply to the will of a soldier executed while in
the service, for in whatever way he may make a will, it is rendered inoperative
by a following one, as the wish of a soldier, however expressed, is a
testament.
35. The Same, Questions, Book XIX.
Where a soldier leaves an imperfect will, the instrument when offered has the
effect of a perfect one, for the testament of a soldier is perfected by the
mere statement of his wishes. Where anyone makes several wills on different
days, he is considered to make his will frequently.
36. The Same, Opinions, Book VI.
An estate is also held to be legally bequeathed where a codicil to a will is
executed; hence, if the testator bequeaths half his estate by a codicil, the
heir, appointed to all of it by the will, will be entitled to half, and any
legacies left by the will must be divided in common, when they are paid.
(1) A soldier, after having appointed different heirs, some to what he obtained
in the service and others to property otherwise acquired, subsequently
designated still other heirs for his property obtained in the service. He is
held to have taken from the first will whatever he bestowed by the second, but
he is not considered to have changed his first will, even though but one heir
was appointed thereby.
(2) A soldier, when drawing up his last will, not being aware that his wife was
pregnant, made no mention of the unborn child. A daughter having been born
after his death, the will appeared to have been broken, and the legacies not to
be due. If, however, in the meantime, the appointed heir should have paid the
legacies, praetorian actions
would be granted the daughter to recover the property, on account of this
unexpected event, and the appointed heir, since he was a bona fide possessor,
will not be obliged to make good anything which he can not recover from the
estate.
(3) A discharged soldier, at the time of his death, wished that a will which he
had executed in accordance with the Common Law during his term of service
should be void, and preferred to die intestate. It was decided that the
appointments of heirs and the substitutions for them would remain unaltered,
but that those who claimed legacies under the will would be barred by an
exception on the ground of bad faith, in accordance with the Common Law, and
that the force of this exception would be regulated according to the standing
of the persons who made the demand; otherwise, all other things being equal,
the condition of the possessor is preferable.
(4) A soldier having made a will according to the Common Law, subsequently made
one in accordance with military law disposing of all his property a year after
his discharge from the service. It was held that the force of the first will
was destroyed and could not be restored.
37. Paulus, Questions, Book VII.
A soldier, who was a freedman, appointed two heirs by his will, and one of them
having refused to accept, the testator was held to have died intestate with
reference to that particular share, for the reason that a soldier can die
partly testate, and praetorian possession can be acquired by a patron ab
intestato; for unless the intention of the deceased was proved to have been
that if one of the heirs should reject his portion, the entire estate should go
to the other heir.
38. The Same, Questions, Book VIII.
When it is said that if a soldier should die within the year after his
discharge, his will, which he executed in accordance with military law, is
valid; this is true even if the condition of his appointment is to be fulfilled
after the lapse of the year, provided that he dies within twelve months.
Therefore, if he should appoint a substitute for his son who was his heir, it
will make no difference when the son dies, for it is sufficient if his father
should die within the year.
(1) A soldier executed a will, and afterwards, having been discharged for no
dishonorable reason, he again enlisted in another corps of soldiers; the
question arose whether the will which he had executed while in the service,
would be valid. I ask whether he executed it in accordance with military law,
or the Common Law. If he executed it according to the Common Law, there is no
doubt that it would be valid; but if he made it as a soldier, I thought it
proper to inquire when he enlisted the second time, after he was discharged,
whether within the year, or afterwards. I ascertained that he enlisted within
the year, and, therefore, as his will was still valid in accordance with
military law, and he could make another under the same law, would his will be
valid after the year had elapsed, if he should die? I have some doubt on this
point, for the reason that his other term of service was more recent.
It is, however, better to hold that the will is valid, the two terms of service
being, so to speak, united. I do not allude to him who, having enlisted a
second time, stated that he wished his will to be valid; for in this instance,
he made it, as it were, during his second term of service, in the same way as
where a civilian makes one and afterwards becomes a soldier.
39. The Same, Questions, Book IX.
Where a son under paternal control, while serving in the army, was captured and
died in the hands of the enemy, we say that the Cornelian Law is also
applicable to his will. We may ask, however, whether his father died before him
at home, and if a grandson was born to him by the said son, whether the will of
the father would be broken, in like manner. It must be held that the will will
not be broken, for the reason that he is considered to have died at the very
time that he was taken prisoner.
40. The Same, Opinions, Book XL
Lucius Titius, a soldier, dictated his will to his secretary to be made from
notes, and before it was fully written out he died. I ask whether this
dictation can be valid. I answered, that it is conceded to soldiers to make
their wills in whatever way they desire, and in whatever way they can, provided
this is done so that it can be established by lawful evidence.
(1) It was also held that where a slave was entitled to a legacy (although
under a condition), by a will drawn up in accordance with military law, he
could also demand his freedom.
(2) An opinion was likewise given in the following case. Lucius Titius, a
soldier, stated in his will: "Let Pamphila be the heir to my entire estate",
and then by another clause, left the same bequest to Sepronius, one of his
comrades, and charged him to manumit the said slave. I ask whether Pamphila
would be his heir, just as if she had received her freedom directly at the
hands of the testator? The answer was, that it should be understood that the
soldier did not know, at the time when he appointed his female slave his heir,
that she would obtain her freedom by virtue of her appointment; and therefore
he afterwards had no reason to request his comrade to manumit her, since she
had become free and his heir under the first clause, and as the bequest was of
no force or effect, the intention of the testator was not interfered with.
41. Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book XVIII.
A soldier can appoint an heir as follows: "As long as Titius lives let him be
my heir, and after his death, let Septicius be my heir". If, however, he should
say: "Let Titius be my heir for ten years", without appointing any substitute,
he will be intestate after the lapse of ten years; and, for the reason we have
already stated, as a soldier can appoint an heir from a certain time, and up to
a certain time, the result is that before the time arrives when the heir ap-
pointed can be admitted to the succession it will become intestate; and since a
soldier is permitted to bequeath a portion of his property, so also, by the
same privilege, he can remain intestate for a period of
considerable extent.
(1) A woman who is suspected of being dissolute cannot take anything under the
will of a soldier, as the Divine Hadrian stated in
a Rescript.
(2) A soldier cannot appoint a guardian for a minor who is
under the control of another.
(3) If a soldier should disinherit his son, or, knowing him to be his son,
should pass him over in silence, the question arises whether he can charge a
substitute with the payment of a legacy. I held that he could not do so, even
though he left an ample legacy to the disinherited son.
(4) A soldier can substitute anyone for an emancipated son; the former,
however, can only exercise his right with reference to property which came from
the father to the son, and so far as any which he already possessed, or
subsequently acquired, is concerned. For if, during the lifetime of his son, or
while the grandfather was still living, he made the substitution, no one can
say that the estate obtained from the grandfather will belong to the
substitute.
Where the estate of a soldier was not entered upon, the question arises whether
the substitution which he made for a minor will be valid. The result is, that
is must be considered valid, because a soldier is allowed to make a will for
his son, even though he may not make one for himself.
42. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XLV.
Anyone can make a will by military law, from the very day he entered the
service, but he cannot do this before; hence those who are not yet actually
enrolled in the army, even although they may have been drafted and travel with
it at the public expense, are not yet considered soldiers, as to be such they
must be included in the ranks.
43. Papinianus, Opinions, Book VI.
A son under paternal control, who belongs to the Equestrian Order and is
enrolled in the retinue of the Emperor, as soon as he is ordered to join the
army, can make a will disposing of his castrense peculium.
44. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XLV.
The Rescripts of the Emperors disclose that if anyone belonging to the class
whose members are not allowed to make a will in accordance with military law
happens to be in the enemy's country, and dies there, he can make a will in any
way that he wishes, and in any way that he can, whether he is the Governor of
the province, or some one else who has no right of testation under military
law.
TITLE II. CONCERNING THE ACQUISITION OR REJECTION OF ESTATES.
1. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book II.
Anyone who has the right to acquire an entire estate cannot, by dividing it,
accept only a portion of the same.
2. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book IV.
If anyone should be appointed an heir to several portions of the same estate,
he cannot accept some of them and reject the others.
3. The Same, On Sabinus, Book VI.
As long as the first heir who was appointed can enter upon an estate, the
substitute cannot do so.
4. The Same, On Sabinus, Book III.
An heir who has no right to enter upon an estate is not considered to have
refused to do so.
5. The Same, On Sabinus, Book I.
It is established that a person who is dumb or deaf, even if he was born so,
can act as an heir and obligate himself for an estate.
(1) It is also settled that anyone who is interdicted by law from disposing of
his property, if he should be appointed an heir, can enter upon an estate.
6. The Same, On Sabinus, Book VI.
Anyone who is subject to the authority of another cannot bind him under whose
control he is for the debts of the estate, without his consent, unless the
father is liable for the debts.
(1) It is established with reference to the possession of property, that that
shall be considered to have been ratified which a son has acknowledged contrary
to the will of his father, while under the control of the latter.
(2) Where, however, the estate of a mother is transferred to her son as heir-
at-law, in accordance with the Orphitian Decree of the Senate, the same rule
should be adopted.
(3) If the son did not accept the estate, but, nevertheless, remained in
possession of the same for a considerable time, he must be held to have
accepted it; as the Divine Pius and Our Emperor stated in a Rescript.
(4) Where he who thought he was a son under paternal control enters upon an
estate by the order of his father; it is held that the said estate was neither
acquired by him, nor by his father who ordered him to accept it, even though
the father may have died after doing so, if he enters upon the estate after his
father's death, and thereby bound himself for its debts; as Julianus states in
the Thirty-first Book of the Digest. For when anyone is in doubt as to whether
or not he is a son under paternal control, and by the death of his father
becomes
his own master, the better opinion is that he can enter upon the estate.
(5) Sometimes a son under paternal control acquires an estate without
acceptance from him under whose control he is; for instance, where a grandson
is appointed the heir instead of a disinherited son, and his father constitutes
him his heir, and even his necessary heir, without his formal acceptance of the
estate.
(6) Where anyone is appointed an heir by a disinherited son, he does not make
him his necessary heir, but he should order him to enter upon the estate, since
he was not under his control at the time of his death; for no one can become a
necessary heir by the act of a party who himself cannot acquire the estate.
(7) Celsus stated in the Fifteenth Book of the Digest that where anyone,
through fear of corporeal punishment, or impelled through any other kind of
duress, pretends to accept an estate;. if he is a freeman, he is not considered
an heir, and if he is a slave, he does not make his master an heir.
7. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book I.
If anyone should appoint a son under paternal control his heir, and afterwards
says: "If the said Titius, a son under paternal control, shall not be my heir,
let Sempronius be my heir"; and the son enters upon the estate by the order of
his father, the substitute will
be excluded.
(1) If the son, before he knew that he was the necessary heir of his father,
should die leaving a son as his necessary heir, the grandson should be
permitted to reject the estate of his grandfather for the reason that this
privilege would also have been granted to his father.
(2) In every succession, anyone who is the heir to a party who is the heir of
Titius, is also held to be himself the heir of Titius, nor can he reject the
estate of the latter.
8. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
In accordance with the custom of our country, neither a male nor a female ward
can bind themselves without the authority of their guardian. It is, however,
perfectly evident that the acceptance of an estate, even if it is not solvent,
renders us liable for its debts. In this instance, we refer to an estate to
which parties do not succeed as
necessary heirs.
(1) A child not arrived at the age of puberty, who is under the control of
another and enters upon an estate by order of the latter, acquires it, even
though he is not legally capable of deliberation.
9. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book II.
Where a ward is competent to act for himself, even though he may be of such an
age as to be unable to understand the meaning of the acceptance of an estate
(although a boy of this age is not supposed to know, or to be able to decide
anything, any more than an insane person) he can, nevertheless, acquire an
estate by the authority of
his guardian; for this privilege is granted to wards by way of favoring them.
10. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
Where an heir to an entire estate intends only to accept a portion of the same,
he is held to have acted as heir to the entire estate.
11. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book III.
Power is granted to children under the age of puberty to absolutely reject the
estates of their fathers, but those who have arrived at puberty can only do so
where they have not meddled with the affairs of the estate.
12. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XI.
When a child has not interfered with the affairs of his father's estate,
whether he is of age or a minor, it is not necessary for him to make
application to the Praetor, but it is sufficient if he has not concerned himself
with the business of the estate. It was stated in a rescript in the Semestria
to Vivius Soter and Victorinus: "It is not necessary to make complete
restitution to wards, on account of a contract made by their grandfather, if
their father intended that they should not accept his estate, where nothing has
been done, nor any business transacted in behalf of the heir."
13. The Same, On Sabinus, Book VII.
A party who has been appointed an heir, or one to whom the estate has descended
by law, loses it by rejecting it. This is true only where the estate is in such
a condition that it can be entered upon, but where the heir is appointed under
a condition, and rejects the estate before the condition has been fulfilled,
his act will be void, no matter what the condition may be, and even if it is
dependent upon his will.
(1) Where an heir is in doubt as to whether the testator is living or not, and
rejects the estate, his act is void.
(2) In like manner, if a substitute rejects an estate before the appointed heir
makes up his mind with reference to it, his rejection will not be valid.
(3) If a son under paternal control, or a father, rejects an estate neither
will prejudice the rights of the other, but both of them can reject it
together.
14. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book II.
The same rule also applies where an estate descends by law to children.
15. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
He who thinks that he is the necessary heir, when he is a voluntary heir,
cannot reject an estate; for, in this instance, more weight is attached to
opinion than to the truth.
16. The Same, On the Edict, Book XXIV.
And, on the other hand, anyone who thinks that he is a necessary heir cannot
become a voluntary heir.
17. The Same, On Sabinus, Book VII.
Nor can anyone who thinks that a will is void, or forged, reject it. But if it
is certain that a will which is said to be forged is not so; since by entering
upon the estate, he can acquire it, so also by rejecting
it he will lose it.
(1) Where an appointed heir, who is at the same time heir-at-law, rejects the
estate by reason of his appointment, he cannot be admitted to the succession on
account of his being the heir-at-law; if, however, as the heir-at-law he should
reject the estate, knowing at the same time that he has been appointed heir to
the same, it should be held that he has rejected it in both capacities. If he
was not aware of his appointment, his rejection will not prejudice him in
either respect, not with reference to the testamentary succession, as he did
not reject this, nor with reference to the legal succession, as it was not yet
granted him.
18. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book II.
Anyone who can acquire an estate can also reject it.
19. The Same, On the Edict, Book LIX.
Where anyone desires to enter upon an estate, or to claim praetorian possession
of the same, he must be certain that the testator is dead.
20. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXI.
He is held to act as an heir who does anything in the capacity of one. And, in
general, Julianus stated that he only acted in the capacity of heir who
transacted any business as such; but to act as heir is not so much a matter of
fact as of intention, for he must intend to perform the act as an heir. Where,
however, he does anything on account of filial affection, or to protect the
property of the estate, or where he acts, not as the heir or the owner, but by
some other right, it is evident that he should not be held to have acted as
heir.
(1) And therefore children who are necessary heirs are accustomed to allege
that, where they transact any business for the estate, they do so only on
account of natural affection or for the sake of protecting the property, or
because it is theirs; as, for instance, where a child buries his father, or
does only what is just and is required of him. If, however, he proceeds with
the intention of becoming an heir, he acts in the capacity of one, for if,
induced by filial reverence, he does anything, he will not be held to have
acted as an heir. In instances of this kind, he provides food for slaves
belonging to the estate, or for beasts of burden, or sells them. If he does
this in the capacity of heir, he acts as heir, and if he does not do so, but
merely attempts to preserve the property because he believes it to be his; or,
while he is deliberating what course he shall pursue, he merely takes measures
that the property of the estate may be preserved; and if he should conclude not
to conduct himself as heir, it is evident that he cannot be held to have acted
in that capacity.
Hence, if he has either leased or repaired any lands or houses belonging to the
estate, or has done anything else of this kind, not with the intention of
acting as heir, but merely for the benefit of the substitution, or of the heir
ab intestato, or sells property which is perishable; he is not in the position
of a person who acts in the capacity of an heir, because he had not the
intention of doing so.
(2) If, however, he should claim any property as heir which does not pass to
the foreign heir, let us see whether he becomes liable for the debts of the
estate; for instance, where he claims the services of a freedman of his father,
which a foreign heir cannot claim, but he can obtain by demanding them; it is
established that he does not act as an heir; for such a demand can be made by
the creditors, and especially for future services to be rendered.
(3) A son who buries a corpse in the family tomb of his father, should not, by
this act, be held to have rendered himself liable to the creditors of the
latter; which opinion is held by Papinianus, and is the more equitable one,
although Julianus states the contrary.
(4) Papinianus says that certain authorities hold that where a son has been
appointed the heir of his father, and declines to accept the estate, if he
receives money from a slave who was to be free on condition of payment, he can
be sued by the creditors of the estate, whether the money paid was, or was not,
a part of the peculium of the slave; because it was received, as it were, by
the wish of the deceased, for the purpose of complying with the condition.
Julianus thinks that the same rule will apply even where the son did not accept
the estate. Finally, Papinianus says that he acts in the capacity of heir only
where he is the sole heir, but if he should have a co-heir, and the latter
enters upon the estate, the son who received the money from the slave should
not be compelled to defend actions brought by the creditors; for, as he
rejected the estate as a son, he should also be entitled under Praetorian Law to
the rights enjoyed by an emancipated child who rejects an inheritance.
Hence, if the slave had been expressly ordered by the testator to pay the money
to his son, he could obtain his freedom even if he did not pay him. He is
therefore said to have acted in the capacity of heir, since he received what he
could not obtain without assuming the name and rights of an heir.
(5) Where a son brings an action against a person who has violated a tomb, even
though it belongs to the estate, he is not considered to have interfered with
the affairs of the same, as he takes nothing from the estate of his father; for
the object of this action is a penalty and punishment rather than the recovery
of property. 21. The Same, On Sabinus, Book VII.
Where a stranger has in his possession property belonging to an estate which he
has purloined or stolen, he does not act in the capacity of heir, for his act
shows a contrary intention.
(1) Sometimes the mere intention of the heir makes him responsible for the
estate; as, for instance, when, in the capacity of heir, he makes use of some
property which does not belong to it.
(2) Still, no one can acquire an estate by acting in the capacity of heir,
where it has already descended to him. But we say that in those cases where we
have held that the rejection of an estate is void, it must be noted that where
the party acts as heir, his acceptance will
also be void.
(3) Where anyone does not know to what portion of the estate he has been
appointed heir, Julianus says that this does not prevent him from acting in
that capacity. This opinion is also approved by Cassius, if the party was aware
of the condition under which he was appointed; provided that the condition has
been complied with. But what if he did not know that the condition had been
complied with? I think that he can enter upon the estate in the same way that
he could if he was not aware that the portion of his co-heir, for whom he was
substituted, had been increased by the rejection of the latter.
22. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book II.
If anyone entitled to the legitimate succession, believing that the deceased
was his slave should, in consequence obtain his peculium, it is held that he
will not be liable to the estate. We therefore say (as Pomponius holds), that
the same rule applies if he should take possession of the estate of one whom he
thought to be his freedman, when, in fact, the latter was freeborn. For, as
anyone by acting in the capacity of heir, renders himself liable to the estate,
he should ascertain under what title the said estate belongs to him; for
example, if the next of kin is appointed heir by a valid will, and before the
latter is produced, and while he thinks that the testator died intestate, even
though he should act in every respect as the owner, he, nevertheless, will not
be the heir.
The same rule of law will apply where he is appointed heir by a will not
properly executed, and the latter having been produced, he thinks that it is
legal, still, he will not acquire the estate; even though he should administer
all the property belonging to it as the owner thereof.
23. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book III.
Where anyone rejects an estate or a legacy, he must be certain of his rights.
24. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
The question arose whether a person is held to have acted in the capacity of
heir who receives a sum of money as compensation for rejecting an estate. It
was decided that he who received the money in consideration of relinquishing
the estate did not act as heir; but that he would still be liable to the
penalty imposed by the Edict of the Praetor. Therefore whether he received the
money from the substitute, or from the heir-at-law, he is held to have received
it mortis causa. The same rule will apply if he did not receive the money, but
it was merely promised to him, for he obtains it by virtue of the stipulation,
mortis causa.
25. The Same, On Sabinus, Book VIII.
When a slave belonging to another, who is serving me in good faith, enters upon
an estate by my order, he will commit an act which is void, and he will not
acquire the said estate for me, nor will such an act be valid if performed by a
slave of whom I am the usufructuary.
(1) A slave belonging to a municipality, corporation, or a decuria, who is
appointed an heir, can enter upon the estate after having been manumitted or
alienated.
(2) If the said slave belongs to the Treasury, he can enter upon the estate by
order of the Imperial Steward, as has been frequently stated in rescripts.
(3) Where it is evident that someone has become a penal slave, by having been
condemned to fight with gladiators, or wild beasts, or to work in the mines,
and he is appointed an heir, his appointment will be considered as not having
been made, as the Divine Pius stated in a Rescript.
(4) The order of a man who has another under his control does not resemble the
authority of a guardian which can be interposed after the transaction has been
completed, but should precede the acceptance; as Gaius Cassius says in the
Second Book of the Civil Law. He also thinks that this order can be
communicated by means of a messenger, or by a letter.
(5) Should the order, however, be given generally, as follows: "Whatever
estates may pass to you", or specifically? The better opinion is (as Gaius
Cassius holds) that it should be given specifically.
(6) The question also arises whether the order can be given expressly with
reference to the estate of a man still living. I think that where it is given
with reference to the estate of a person who is still living, it should not be
obeyed. It is evident that if the report was current that Lucius Titius was
dead, or if the will was not yet opened, and it was still uncertain whether the
son was designated the heir, the party appointed heir could be ordered to enter
upon the estate.
(7) But what if the order should be given to "acquire the estate"? Would it be
held that the party had been directed to enter upon it? What if he should be
ordered to "apply for praetorian possession of the estate", or "to sell the
property belonging to it"? Or what if the son should enter upon the estate,
after the father had ratified his demand for praetorian possession of the same?
Or what if the son should enter upon the estate, after having been ordered to
act in the capacity of heir? Can it be doubted that he would be held to have
entered upon it by order of his father? Indeed, the better opinion is, that in
all these cases, attention should be called to the entry upon the estate.
(8) A father wrote to his son as follows: "I know, my son, that you will watch
with prudence over the estate of Lucius Titius, which has been conferred upon
you." I think that the son enters upon the estate by order of his father.
(9) What if he ordered, as follows: "Enter upon the estate, if it is expedient
for you to do so"; "If you think it is expedient to enter upon the estate, do
so"? The entry upon the estate will be by order
of the father.
(10) If a father should order his son to enter upon the estate, "In the
presence of Titius", or with the consent of Lucius Titius, I think that the
order is given in accordance with law.
(11) Where, however, the order is given to a son as heir to the entire estate,
and it should be ascertained that he is heir only to a portion of the same; I
do not think that he can enter upon it under such an order. But, if his father
orders him to accept only a portion of the estate, he can accept the whole of
it. The case is different where he orders him to enter upon it as ab intestato,
and he does so by virtue of a will, for I think that then his act is not valid;
but if the order was to enter upon the estate by virtue of a will, the son can
likewise do so ab intestato; since he does not make the condition of his father
any worse.
The same rule applies where the father directs the son to enter upon the estate
as an appointed heir, and it is ascertained that he is a substitute, or vice
versa.
(12) Where, however, a father directs his son to enter upon an estate, he being
a substitute of a child under the age of puberty, the order will not be
sufficient.
(13) It is clear that if the order was as follows: "If any estate passes to you
by the will of Lucius Titius", it can be maintained that he can enter upon it
under an order of this kind.
(14) But if after he has given the order, he should change his mind before the
son has entered upon the estate, and he does so, his
act will be void.
(15) Likewise, if he should give his son to be arrogated before the latter
enters upon the estate, the estate will not be acquired by him.
26. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book II.
If I am appointed an heir together with my slave or my son, and I order my son
or my slave to enter upon the estate, Pomponius says that I will immediately
become the heir through my own appointment. Marcellus and Julianus both concur
in his opinion.
27. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book III.
Labeo says that no one can act as heir during the lifetime of the person, the
administration of whose estate is in question.
28. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book VIII.
Aristo thinks that the Praetor should give the heir who is deliberating with
reference to his acceptance of the estate the right to enter upon the same, in
order to demand the papers of the deceased from the party with whom they have
been deposited.
29. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book III.
Where anyone who has been appointed an heir is prevented by another heir, who
was appointed along with him and has already entered upon the estate, from
examining the papers of the deceased, from which he may ascertain whether he
ought to accept it or not, he is not held to have acted in the capacity of
heir.
30. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book VIII.
Where a man absent on an embassy is not able to order his son who was appointed
an heir, and is in a province, to enter upon the estate; the Divine Pius stated
in a Rescript addressed to the Consuls that relief should be granted him when
his son died, for the reason that he was absent on business for the State.
(1) Where it is said that: "The next of kin to a posthumous child cannot enter
upon the estate so long as the woman is pregnant, or is thought to be so, but
if he knows that she is not pregnant, he can enter upon it"; it is understood
that this is applicable to the next of kin to the unborn child, who, when born,
will be the proper heir of the deceased. These words not only have reference to
persons dying testate, but also to intestates. And the same must be understood
to apply to an unborn child who will be either the proper heir, or a blood
relative; since the former at the time of the death is considered as already
born, so far as deferring the succession of more remote heirs and making a
place for itself therein if it should be brought forth, is concerned. The same
rule applies to the possession of property granted by the Praetorian Edict.
Finally, the Praetor places the unborn child in possession of the estate.
(2) Therefore, if I think that the woman is pregnant, or if she actually is
pregnant, and the child which she is to bring forth will be the proper heir of
the deceased, I cannot enter upon the estate, as the will is liable to be
broken by the birth of the heir, unless you suppose the case that the unborn
child is either appointed an heir, or disinherited.
(3) The statement, "If he thinks that she is pregnant", must be understood to
mean if she asserts she is in that condition. But what if she should not say
that she is pregnant, but denies it, and others say that she is in that
condition? The estate cannot then be entered upon, even though you may suppose
midwives to confirm the existence of her pregnancy. What if the heir alone
thinks that the woman is pregnant? If he has good reason for thinking so, he
cannot enter upon the estate; but if his opinion agrees with that of many
others he can do so.
(4) But what if the woman was pregnant, and the heir thought that she was not,
and entered upon the estate, and afterwards an abortion was produced? There is
no doubt whatever that his act will be void. Hence this opinion will benefit
the heir as often as it agrees with the truth.
(5) Where, however, the woman herself is appointed heir, and pretends to be
pregnant, she will acquire the estate by entering upon
it. On the other hand, she will not acquire it, if she thinks she is pregnant
and this is not the case.
(6) It is certain that a proper heir is entitled to the entire estate, even
though he thinks that the woman is pregnant, when this is not true. What course
must be pursued if she is pregnant of one child? Will it be heir to half of the
estate, whether you suppose the case of the appointment of a posthumous child,
or that the father died intestate? This opinion which Tertullianus states in
the Fourth Book of Questions, was held by Sextus Pomponius; for he thought that
when the woman was not pregnant the proper heir was entitled to the whole
estate; as when she is only pregnant of one child, a second cannot be formed in
accordance with the nature of the human race, for this only happens a certain
time after conception, and the heir already born, even though he was not aware
of the fact, will be entitled to half, and not to a fourth of the estate, as is
held by Julianus.
(7) When a son under paternal control or a slave is appointed an heir, shall
the knowledge or opinion of the master or the father as to the pregnancy be
adopted? Suppose the father thinks that the woman is pregnant, and the son is
certain that she is not, and, in accordance with his belief, he enters upon the
estate, will he obtain it? I think that he will, but in the opposite case I
hold that he will not do so.
(8) If I am certain that a will is not forged, void, or broken, although it is
said to be, I can enter upon the estate.
31. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book II.
Where an heir is appointed along with a posthumous child, the remainder of the
estate bequeathed to the latter will accrue to the other heir, if it is certain
that the woman is not pregnant, even though the heir may be ignorant of the
fact.
32. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book VIII.
An appointed heir cannot enter upon the estate if he thinks that the testator
is living, even though he may already be dead.
(1) But even if he knows that he has been appointed an heir, but is ignorant as
to whether his appointment was absolute or conditional, he cannot enter upon
the estate, even though he may have been appointed heir absolutely, or if he
was appointed under a condition, even though he may have complied with it.
(2) Where, however, the heir is uncertain as to the condition of the testator,
namely, as to whether he was the head of a household or a son under paternal
control, he cannot enter upon the estate, even though his condition was in fact
such as to enable him to make a will.
33. Paulus, On Plautius, Book XII.
When the heir is in doubt as to whether the deceased died in the hands of the
enemy, or as a Roman citizen at home, since in both cases he has the right to
enter upon the estate, and is in a condition to do so, it must be said that he
can enter upon it.
34. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book VIII.
Where anyone is in doubt as to his own condition and whether he is a son under
paternal control, it has already been stated that he can acquire an estate. But
why can he enter upon an estate if he is ignorant of his own condition, but if
he is ignorant of that of the testator he cannot do so? The reason is that he
who is ignorant of the condition of the testator does not know whether his will
is valid or not; but he who is aware of his own is certain of the validity of
the will.
(1) If an heir was appointed absolutely, but thinks that he was appointed under
a condition, and, after complying with it, enters upon the estate, can he
acquire it? It follows that he can legally enter upon it, especially when the
opinion which he entertains places no obstacle in his way, nor causes him any
risk. This would be more readily admitted, where someone who was absolutely
appointed thought that he was appointed under a condition, and that the
condition which depended upon some event had been fulfilled; for this opinion
presented no obstacle to his acceptance of the estate.
35. The Same, On Sabinus, Book IX.
Where anyone has been appointed an heir to a portion of an estate, and was
afterwards substituted for Titius, his co-heir, and acted in the capacity of
heir before the estate vested in him by virtue of the substitution; he will
also be heir on account of the substitution; since the share of his co-heir
accrued to him without his consent. I hold that the same rule will apply where
a son under paternal control or a slave, by order of his father or master,
enters upon an estate, and, after having been emancipated or manumitted,
acquires it by reason of the substitution, for they become heirs through the
effect of the preceding appointment.
(1) Where a father, who was excluded on account of the condition imposed upon
him not having been fulfilled, orders his son to enter upon the estate, it must
be held that he cannot, by this means, obtain his share.
(2) But when he orders one of two sons to enter upon the estate, he must also
order the other to do so.
36. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book III.
If a father or a master should enter upon his share of an estate, he must order
his son or his slave, who is his co-heir, to enter upon it also.
37. The Same, On Sabinus, Book V.
An heir succeeds to every right of the deceased, and not merely to the
ownership of certain property, for any liabilities which were contracted also
pass to him.
38. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XLIII.
Where there are two necessary heirs, one of whom refuses to accept his share of
the estate, and the other, after the refusal of the
first, busies himself with its affairs; it must be held that he cannot decline
to assume all the liabilities of the estate; for he either knew, or could have
ascertained, that when the other refused he would be liable for the
indebtedness, and he is held to have entered upon the estate under this
condition.
39. The Same, On the Edict, Book XLVI.
As long as an estate can be entered upon by virtue of a will, it does not
descend as intestate.
40. The Same, Disputations, Book IV.
The question arose, where a son had not obtained any portion of his father's
estate, but had still received something, or performed some act in accordance
with his father's will, whether he could be compelled to be liable to his
father's creditors, just as if he had been substituted for a son under the age
of puberty? In a case of this kind, Julianus slated in the Twenty-sixth Book of
the Digest that he would come within the scope of the Edict, if he had meddled
with the affairs of the minor's estate, for where anyone opposes the will of a
parent, he ought not to obtain anything from his estate.
Marcellus, however, makes a very nice distinction in this instance, since it
makes a great deal of difference whether the son was appointed heir to the
entire estate of his father, by the will of the latter, or only to a portion of
the same; as if he was only an heir to a portion, he could obtain the estate of
the minor after it had been separated from that of the father.
41. Julianus, Digest, Book XXVI.
If a son should reject the estate of his father, and, acting in the capacity of
heir, meddles with that of his disinherited brother, he can obtain the said
estate by virtue of the substitution.
42. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book IV.
Julianus says in the Twenty-first Book of the Digest that if a minor rejects
the estate of his father, and someone appears as his heir, the latter cannot be
compelled to be liable to the father's creditors, unless he was substituted for
the said minor; for he is inclined to believe that in this case the
substitution must be responsible for the father's
debts.
This opinion is very properly rejected, by Marcellus, as being opposed to the
interest of the minor, who himself, at all events, can have a successor; for
anyone would enter upon the estate with great reluctance if he was apprehensive
of being liable for the debts of the father. Otherwise, he says, if he had a
brother who rejected the will in order to obtain the estate as heir-at-law, he
could do so with impunity; for he would not be held to have intended to evade
the Edict, which provides for this, in order to prevent the estate of the minor
from being burdened with the debts of the father.
What, however, was stated with reference to the brother, I think should be
understood to apply to the brother of the testator, and not
to that of the minor. But if another brother was substituted for the minor, he
would undoubtedly be his necessary heir.
(1) If a son, after the death of his father, should continue to belong in the
same firm of which he was a member during the lifetime of his father, Julianus
very properly says, by way of distinction, that it makes a difference whether
he merely finishes some business which had been begun by his father, or he
himself does something which is entirely new; for where he commences something
entirely new which is connected with the partnership to which he belongs, he
will not be considered to have interfered with the estate of his father.
(2) If a son should manumit a slave that belongs to his father, he will
undoubtedly be held to have interfered with his father's estate.
(3) The following case has been suggested, namely: A son purchased slaves from
his father with his castrense peculium, and was appointed heir by his father
and charged to manumit said slaves. The question arose, if he should reject his
father's estate, and manumit the slaves, would he be considered to have
interfered with the estate of his father? He says that unless it was evident
that he had manumitted them while acting as heir, he should not be apprehensive
of being held responsible for having interfered with the estate.
43. Julianus, Digest, Book XXX.
An heir cannot, by means of a slave belonging to an estate, acquire a share of
said estate, or any property forming part of the same.
44. The Same, Digest, Book XLV1I.
Whenever a minor is the heir of his father, and refuses to accept his estate,
although the property of the deceased passes into the hands of his creditors,
still, whatever the minor has done in good faith should be confirmed.
Therefore, if anyone should purchase a tract of land from a ward, with the
consent of his guardian, relief should be granted him; and it makes no
difference whether the ward is solvent or not.
45. The Same, On Urseius Ferox, Book I.
The acceptance of an estate is not included in the service of a slave.
(1) Therefore, if a dotal slave should enter upon an estate, the wife can
recover it in an action on dowry, even though the property acquired by the
labor of dotal slaves belongs to her husband.
(2) Where a partnership for profit and gain is entered into, each partner must
pay into the common fund whatever he earns by his labor, but each one can
acquire an estate for himself.
(3) Moreover, a slave in whom someone has an usufruct cannot enter upon an
estate by order of him who enjoys said usufruct.
(4) The opinion has been stated by certain authorities that if a freeman who is
serving me as a slave in good faith should be appointed an heir on my account,
he can enter upon the estate by my order. This is true where it is understood
that he does not acquire the estate as the result of his own labor, but on
account of his having charge
of my property; just as in making a stipulation and by accepting delivery he
acquires property for me by virtue of his transacting my business.
46. Africanus, Questions, Book I.
A will is said to be forged even if the heir himself is accused of having
fabricated it, since he must be sure that he did not commit the forgery in
order to be able to legally enter upon the estate; but where another is accused
of having done this without the knowledge of the heir, he cannot enter upon the
estate if there is any doubt of the will being genuine.
47. The Same, Questions, Book VI.
A certain man ordered his slave, who had been appointed an heir to accept the
estate, and before he did so, the master became insane. It is said that the
slave cannot legally enter upon the estate, as an estate cannot be acquired
without the consent of his master, and an insane person cannot give his
consent.
48. Paulus, Manuals, Book I.
Where one person directs another to demand praetorian possession of an estate
for him if he should deem it advisable, and, after the demand is made, he
becomes insane, he will, nevertheless, acquire possession of the property. If,
however, before the demand is made, he whom he ordered to make it should become
insane, it must be said that he will not immediately acquire possession of the
estate. Therefore, the demand for praetorian possession should be confirmed by
ratification.
49. Africanus, Questions, Book IV.
It is held that a ward, who enters upon an estate even with the consent of his
guardian who does not transact his business, is rendered liable.
50. Modestinus, On Inventions.
Where a guardian by a letter orders the slave of his ward to enter upon an
estate, and dies after having signed it, before the slave has entered upon the
estate in obedience to the letter, no one can say that the ward will
subsequently be liable for the debts of the estate.
51. Africanus, Questions, Book IV.
Where an heir is appointed by two wills executed by the same testator, and is
in doubt as to whether the last one may not be forged, it is held that he
cannot enter upon the estate by virtue of either.
(1) A son under paternal control, having been appointed an heir, notified his
father that the estate appeared to him to be solvent. His father replied that
he had been informed that there was a question as to its solvency, and
therefore that he should examine it more carefully, and accept it if he found
that it was solvent. The son having received the letter of his father, entered
upon the estate. It was doubt-
ed whether he did so according to law. It may be said to be more probable that
if he was not thoroughly convinced that the estate was solvent, his father
would not be liable.
(2) If anyone should say, "If the estate is solvent, I will accept it", such an
acceptance is void.
52. Marcianus, Institutes, Book IV.
A son that was under the control of his father who was insane was appointed an
heir; the Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that he would be indulgent, and that
if the said son should enter upon the estate, it would be considered just as if
his father had done so, and that he would allow him to manumit the slaves
belonging to said estate.
(1) When anyone is appointed an heir to one portion of an estate absolutely,
and to the remaining portion under a condition, if he enters upon the estate
while the condition is still pending, he will become the heir to the whole of
it; for the reason that he will be the heir under all circumstances, unless he
has a substitute for that part of the estate which depends upon the fulfillment
of the condition.
53. Gaius, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book XIV.
Where an heir has been appointed to two shares of an estate, to one absolutely,
and to the other conditionally, and accepts the share left to him absolutely,
and then dies, and the condition is subsequently fulfilled, that share of the
estate dependent upon it will also belong to his heir.
(1) Where anyone becomes the heir to one share of an estate, he will also even
without his consent, acquire the shares of his co-heirs who refuse to accept
them; that is to say, their shares will tacitly accrue to him, even contrary to
his will.
54. Florentinus, Institutes, Book VIII.
Where an heir enters upon an estate, he is understood to have succeeded the
deceased from the date of his death.
55. Marcianus, Rules, Book II.
When a necessary heir rejects the estate of his father, his co-heir whether he
be a proper heir, or a stranger, can either accept the entire estate or reject
it; and where he cannot reject it himself, he can do so on account of its
refusal by his co-heir. If, however, the creditors should say that they will be
content with his share because he cannot be discharged from liability unless he
be allowed to make his choice, they should relinquish the other's share in
order that the rights of action growing out of it may be assigned to the co-
heir who is sued.
56. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LVII.
Where one of two heirs meddles with an estate and dies, and afterwards the
other rejects it, his heir will be entitled to the same choice that the
deceased himself would have had; which is the opinion of Marcellus.
57. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XXIII.
The Proconsul gives necessary heirs --- not only those who are under the age of
puberty but also all over that age --- the power to reject an estate; so that
although they are liable to the creditors of the same under the Civil Law,
still, an action is not granted against them if they wish to relinquish the
estate. And, indeed, he grants this privilege to those under the age of
puberty, even if they have busied themselves with the affairs of the estate,
but he also grants it to those over that age, where they have not done so.
(1) Nevertheless, where minors under the age of twenty-five years have rashly
interfered with the affairs of the insolvent estate of their father, relief can
be granted them by the general terms of the Edict, with reference to minors who
are under that age; for if, being strangers, they should enter upon an
insolvent estate, complete restitution can be granted them in compliance with
the Edict.
(2) This privilege, however, is not conferred upon slaves who are necessary
heirs, whether they are over, or under, the age of puberty.
58. Paulus, Rules, Book II.
Where a slave is appointed heir to a portion of an estate, and his co-heir has
not yet entered upon the estate, he becomes free and a necessary heir, because
he does not receive his freedom from his coheir, but from himself; unless his
appointment was made as follows: "When anyone becomes my heir, let Stichus be
free and be my heir."
59. Neratius, Parchments, Book II.
Where anyone becomes the heir of his father, and is also appointed the
substitute of a child under the age of puberty, he cannot reject the estate of
the latter. This must be understood to apply, even if the heir should die
during the lifetime of the minor, and then the minor himself should die; for
whoever becomes the heir will necessarily also be the heir of the minor. For if
the second heir binds himself against his will, it must be held that the estate
of the minor is united with that of the father, and, by the right of accrual,
it is acquired by whoever becomes the heir of the father.
60. Javolenus, On the Last Works of Labeo, Book I.
A father appointed his emancipated son his sole heir, and ordered that, if he
should not become his heir, his slave should be free and be his heir. The son
demanded praetorian possession of his father's estate on the ground of
intestacy, alleging that he was insane, and in this way obtained possession of
it.
Labeo says that if his father should be proved to have been of sound mind when
he made his will, the son will be his heir by virtue of the will. I think that
this opinion is incorrect, for where an emancipated son declines to accept an
estate given to him by will, it immediately passes to the substituted heir; nor
can he be held to have acted in the capacity of heir who demands praetorian
possession under an-
other section of the Edict, in order to avoid taking advantage of his rights
under the will. Paulus: "Proculus disapproves of the opinion of Labeo, and
adopts that of Javolenus."
61. Macer, On the Duties of Governor, Book I.
Where a minor, after having accepted an estate, obtains complete restitution,
the Divine Severus decreed that his co-heir is not bound to assume liability
for the debts of his share of the estate, but that praetorian possession of the
same should be granted to the creditors.
62. Javolenus, On the Last Works of Labeo, Book I.
Antistius Labeo says that if an heir is appointed as follows: "Let him be my
heir, if he will make oath", he will, nevertheless, not become the heir at
once, even though he should be sworn before he performs some act in that
capacity; because by taking the oath he is held merely to have disclosed his
intention. I think, however, that he has acted in the capacity of heir if he
has taken the oath as such. Proculus entertains the same opinion, and this is
our practice.
(1) Where a slave is appointed an heir, and is alienated after having been
ordered by his master to accept the estate, before he does so, a new order by
his second master, and not that of his old one, is required.
63. Notes of Marcellus, On the Rules of Pomponius.
An insane person cannot, under a will, acquire for himself the benefit of an
estate, unless he is the necessary heir of his father, or the heir of his
master; but he can acquire the estate through the agency of another, as for
instance, by a slave or someone whom he has under his control.
64. Javolenus, On the Last Works of Labeo, Book II.
The slave of two masters was appointed an heir and ordered to enter upon the
estate; if he did so, by the order of one of them, and then was manumitted, he
could himself become the heir of half the said estate by entering upon the
same.
65. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book II.
Hence, if the same slave was given a substitute in the following terms: "If he
should not be my heir, let So-and-So be my heir", the substitute will be
excluded from the succession.
66. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXI.
Where a slave owned in common becomes the necessary heir of one, or several, or
all of his masters, he cannot refuse to accept the estate of any of them.
67. The Same, Rules, Book I.
Where a slave owned in common is appointed an heir by a stranger, and enters
upon the estate by the order of one of his masters; this does not, in the
meantime, constitute him the heir of a larger amount
than his master is entitled to. If, however, his other masters do not order him
to accept the estate, their shares will accrue to him tacitly by operation of
law.
68. Paulus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book V.
Where a slave is appointed sole heir, just as he is permitted, at the same
time, to enter upon the estate by the order of all his masters, so also he can
legally enter upon it by the order of each one of them, at different times;
for, because he enters upon it frequently, he is considered to do so for the
sake of convenience, and on account of the right of his masters, and not by
virtue of the will, in order to prevent the right of one from being prejudiced
by the undue haste of another.
69. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LX.
So long as the appointed heir is entitled to be admitted to the succession
there is no place for the substitute, for he cannot succeed until the appointed
heir has been excluded; the result therefore will be that the remedy of the
Praetor becomes necessary, as well with reference to the refusal of actions to
the heir, as to the granting of time to the substitute, because the latter
cannot accept the estate, or perform any act as heir within the term granted by
law to the one who was appointed. But a substitute appointed in the third
degree, if the second heir dies while the first is deliberating, can himself
succeed. Hence we wait for each one in order that the estate may pass to them,
then, after this has taken place, we wait during the prescribed time, and if
within this time the parties do not enter upon the estate, or perform any acts
as heirs, we refuse them rights of action.
70. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LIX.
The following rule must be observed with reference to the different degrees of
heirs, namely, where a will is produced, the appointed heir shall be given the
preference; then we pass to those to whom the estate belongs by law, even if
there should be but one heir who is entitled to it under both heads; for this
order must be followed so that the heir may first reject the estate left him by
will, and afterwards that given him by law. The same rule applies to praetorian
possession to enable the testamentary heir to reject the estate, and the one
who was entitled to it by law on the ground of intestacy.
(1) If, however, a condition is prescribed for the party to whom the estate
will belong by law, he cannot come to any conclusion before the time appointed
for the fulfillment of the condition has passed. Therefore it must be said, in
this instance, if he answers that he does not desire that the estate shall
belong to him by either title, praetorian possession of the estate of the
deceased shall be granted his creditors.
71. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXI.
If anyone should ransom a slave belonging to another from the enemy, and
appoint him his heir with the gift of freedom, I am inclined to think that he
will be free, and the necessary heir of the
testator. For the latter, when he granted him his freedom, released him from
his bond, and gave him power to enjoy the right of postliminium, so that he
would not again become the slave of the party to whom he belonged before he was
captured (for this would be extremely wicked), but to enable him to tender to
his former master the price of his ransom, or remain obligated to him until he
could pay it; which provision was introduced in favor of freedom.
(1) If a slave should be purchased under this law in order to be manumitted
within a certain time, and he is appointed heir with the grant of his freedom,
let us see if he will be entitled to relief if he declines to accept the
estate. The better opinion is, that until the prescribed time has elapsed, he
can become the necessary heir of the testator, and cannot reject the estate;
but where the time has expired, he then becomes not the necessary, but the
voluntary heir, and can reject it in the same way that he, to whom freedom is
due under the terms of a trust can do.
(2) If a slave should give money to his master in order that he may be
manumitted, I think that, by all means, relief should be granted him.
(3) The Praetor says: "If either a male or a female heir should have committed
an act by which any property has been taken from the estate."
(4) If a proper heir should state that he is unwilling to retain the estate,
and has removed any property belonging to it, he shall not have the privilege
of refusal.
(5) The Praetor did not say: "If the heir should take anything"; but, "If either
a male or a female heir should have committed an act by which any property has
been taken from the estate." Therefore, if the heir should himself remove any
of the property, or cause this to be done, the Edict will apply.
(6) We understand anyone to have taken the property belonging to an estate, to
mean that he has concealed, embezzled, or squandered said property.
(7) The Praetor says: "By which any property has been taken from the estate",
and the Edict applies whether one article or several have been taken, or
whether the property in question forms a portion of the estate, or is connected
with the same.
(8) A person is not held to have taken property, where he did not act with
fraudulent or malicious intent. Nor will he be held to have done so who was
mistaken with reference to the property, and was not aware that it belonged to
the estate. Hence, if he took it without the intention of misappropriating it,
or causing damage to the estate, but under the impression that it did not
belong to it, it must be held that he should not be considered to have
appropriated it to his own use.
(9) These words of the Edict apply to him who, in the first place, took some of
the property and afterwards rejected the estate; but if he rejected it in the
first place, and then misappropriated the property, let us see whether the
Edict will apply. I think that it is better
in this instance to adopt the opinion of Sabinus, namely, that the heir will be
liable to the creditors of the estate in an action of theft; for where the heir
has refused the estate, he afterwards becomes liable on account of the crime.
72. Paulus, On Plautius, Book I.
If an heir should be appointed as follows: "Let him enter upon the estate
within a certain time, and if he should not do so, let another be substituted
for him", and the first heir dies before entering upon the estate, no one can
doubt that the substitute will not be obliged to wait until the last day fixed
for acceptance.
73. The Same, On Plautius, Book VII.
Where anyone, not acting as heir, but as the son of his patron, being in want,
asks for support from the freedman of his patron, there is no doubt that he
does not, by so doing, interfere with the management of his father's estate.
Labeo also very properly holds this opinion.
74. The Same, On Plautius, Book XII.
If an heir thinks that he was ordered to pay ten aurei, when in fact he was
ordered to pay five, and he pays ten, he will become the heir by entering upon
the estate.
(1) But if he thinks that he was ordered to pay five, when he was ordered to
pay ten, and he pays five, he does not comply with the condition. This,
however, will be of some advantage to him, for if he should pay the remainder,
the condition will be held to have been complied with by the payment of the
other five aurei.
(2) Where a freeman serves as a slave in good faith, and enters upon an estate
by the order of his supposed master, he will not become liable.
(3) The position of a slave who is to be liberated upon a certain condition is
similar to the one where he is ordered by the heir to enter upon an estate, and
does so after the condition upon which his freedom depends has been fulfilled,
even if he is not aware of it.
(4) Where a slave has been appointed heir by someone, there is some doubt
whether he is entitled to his freedom by virtue of the will of his master, when
he does not know whether the condition upon which his freedom depends has been
fulfilled or not; or where the estate has been accepted, whether he can become
the heir by entering upon the same. Julianus says that he will become the heir.
75. Marcellus, Digest, Book IX.
Titius was appointed heir to half of an estate, and, through mistake, demanded
possession of only one-fourth of it. I ask whether such a demand is not void,
or whether all his rights are saved just as if the fourth of the estate had not
been mentioned by him. The answer was, that the better opinion is that the
demand is of no force or effect, just as if in the case where a party has been
appointed heir to half of an estate, he erroneously only accepts a quarter of
the same.
76. Javolenus, Epistles, Book IV.
If you have been appointed heir to one-sixth of an estate, under a certain
condition, and Titius, to whom you were substituted, refuses to take his share,
and you accept the estate by virtue of the substitution, and the condition
under which you were entitled to a sixth is fulfilled, I ask whether it will be
necessary for you to enter upon the estate in order to avoid losing your sixth.
The answer was, that it makes no difference whether the estate is entered upon
by reason of the substitution, or on account of the first appointment; since in
either instance a single acceptance will be sufficient. Hence the sixth part
which was granted to me under a condition belongs to me alone.
(1) Moreover, if you fail to accept the sixth of the estate to which you were
appointed the heir, do you think that by accepting under the substitution you
will be entitled to a part of the share of Titius? I do not doubt that if I can
become the heir by accepting under the first appointment, it will be in my
power either to reject, or claim any part of the estate which may be desired.
77. Pomponius, On Quintus Mucius, Book VIII.
A doubt may arise whether, after I have been appointed heir by the will of a
person whose estate, even if he should die intestate, would belong to me as
heir-at-law, I can reject both titles to the estate at the same time, for the
reason that the estate did not belong to me by law, before I rejected it as
bequeathed by will. It is true that I am understood to have rejected at the
same time the estate bequeathed by the will and the one conferred by law, just
as if I wished the latter to belong to me, when I knew that it also had been
left to me by will; hence I shall be held to have first rejected the
testamentary estate, and in this way to have acquired the one conferred by law.
78. The Same, on Quintus Mucius, Book XXXV.
Two brothers held their property in common, one of them who died intestate did
not leave any direct heir, and his brother, who survived him, refused to be his
heir. The question was asked whether the latter rendered himself liable for the
debts of the estate, because he had made use of the common property after he
knew that his brother was dead. The answer was, that if he had not used said
property because he wished to be the heir, he would not be liable. Therefore he
should be careful not to exercise ownership upon any more of the property than
he was entitled to as his share.
79. Ulpianus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book II.
It is established that whenever an estate, or anything else, is acquired
through some person who is under the control of another, it is immediately
acquired by the latter, and does not remain for a moment vested in him by whom
it is acquired, and hence it is directly obtained by the party entitled to it.
80. Paulus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book IV.
If I should be appointed sole heir to several shares in an estate, I cannot
reject one share, nor does it make any difference whether or not I have a
substitute for said share.
(1) I think that the same rule will apply, even where I have been appointed
together with other heirs, or have been appointed heir to several shares,
because by the acceptance of one of the shares, I will acquire all of them, if
they should be rejected.
(2) Moreover, if one of my slaves has been absolutely appointed an heir to a
portion of an estate, and conditionally appointed to another portion, having,
for example, a co-heir, and he enters upon the estate by my direction, and
after he has been manumitted, the condition upon which the other portion of the
estate depends is fulfilled; the better opinion is that the first portion is
not acquired by me but follows the slave himself. For everything should remain
in the same state at the time when the condition of the second share was
fulfilled, in order that it may be acquired by him who was entitled to the
first
portion.
(3) Therefore, I think that if the slave remains under the control of his
original master, he must enter upon the estate a second time, if the condition
should be fulfilled; and when we stated that the heir should only enter upon
the estate but once, this has reference to the heir himself personally, and
does not apply where the estate is acquired through the intervention of
another.
81. Ulpianus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book XIII.
An appointed heir is held to have signified his acceptance even in case of
substitution, whenever he can acquire the property for himself; for if he
should die, he will not transfer the substitution to his heir.
82. Terentius Clemens, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book XVI.
If the slave of a person who is incapable of taking under a will should be
appointed an heir, and is manumitted or alienated before entering upon the
estate by order of his master, and commits no act for the purpose of evading
the law, he himself will be admitted to the succession. If, however, his master
can take but a certain share of the estate, the same rule will apply to that
portion which he cannot take under the will. For, generally speaking, it makes
no difference where the question is raised whether someone cannot take anything
under a will, or can only take a part of the estate.
83. Ulpianus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book XVIII.
If anyone should be tacitly requested to surrender to another the entire share
of an estate to which he has been appointed heir, it is evident that he can
receive nothing by accrual, because he is not considered to be entitled to the
property.
84. Papinianus, Questions, Book XVI.
Where an unborn child is passed over, and an emancipated son or a stranger is
appointed heir, as long as the will can be broken by the birth of the child,
the estate cannot be transferred in accordance with the terms of the will. If,
however, the woman should not prove
to be pregnant, and, while this is uncertain, the son remaining in the family
should die, he is understood to have been the heir; and whether he be either an
emancipated son or a stranger, he cannot acquire the inheritance unless he
knows that the woman was not pregnant.
Therefore, if the woman should actually be pregnant, would it not be unjust if,
in the meantime, the son who died could leave nothing to his heir? Hence relief
should be granted to the son, under the decree, because, whether a brother
should be born to him or not, he will still be the heir of his father.
The same course of reasoning makes it plain that relief should also be granted
to an emancipated son who, in either instance, will certainly be entitled to
possession of the estate.
85. The Same, Questions, Book XXX.
If anyone, induced by fear, should enter upon an estate, the result will be
that, because he becomes the heir against his will, the power to reject the
estate may be granted him.
86. The Same, Opinions, Book VI.
Pannonius Avitus, while acting as the Imperial Steward in Cilicia, was
appointed an heir, but died before he learned of his appointment. His heirs, as
representatives of the deceased, petitioned for complete restitution, because
in that capacity, they could not take possession of the estate now claimed by
his deputy, and which, according to the strict construction of the law, he was
not entitled to; because Avitus had died within the time appointed for its
acceptance.
Marcellus, in the Book of Questions, states that the Divine Pius rendered a
contrary decision with reference to a party who was at Rome as the member of an
embassy, where his son, being absent, had failed to obtain the possession of
property which descended from his mother, and that, without respect to this
distinction, there was ground for restitution. This rule should also in the
interest of justice be applicable in this case.
(1) The emancipated son of a person accused of treason, who is certain of the
innocence of his father, can obtain his estate while the examination of the
case is pending.
(2) It is established that a son has acted in the capacity of heir, when, at
the time of his death, he knew that his mother had died intestate, and asks his
heir in a codicil to manumit a slave belonging to his mother's estate, and to
erect a monument for himself and his parents on land forming part of her
estate.
87. The Same, Opinions, Book X.
It is held that a son meddles with the estate of his father, if he appears to
act in the capacity of heir, where the family ties have been broken. Therefore,
a son who accepts the estate of his mother, and obtains land belonging to the
estate of his father, of which he takes possession, not being aware that it is
part of his mother's estate, is not held to have lost the right to reject the
estate.
(1) It has been decided that mixed actions should be granted to minors, who, it
has been held, must be released from liability for the debts of an estate.
88. Paulus, Questions, Book I.
A person acts in the capacity of heir, who signifies his intention of accepting
an estate, even though he does not touch any of the property forming part of
the same. Hence, if he should keep a house as belonging to the estate but which
had been given by way of pledge, the possession of which was, in any way, held
by the estate, he will be considered to have acted as the heir.
The same rule will apply if he should retain possession of any other property
as a part of the estate.
89. Scaevola, Questions, Book XIII.
If a minor rejects an estate, relief must be granted to the sureties given by
him, if suit should be brought against them on account of some contract
relating to the estate.
90. Paulus, Opinions, Book XII.
Paulus holds that an estate cannot be acquired through the intervention of a
curator.
(1) He also gives it as his opinion that if a grandson should enter upon the
estate of his father who made a will disposing of his castrense peculium by the
order of his grandfather, he will acquire for the benefit of his grandfather
all that his father was able to dispose of by will; because castrensial
property ceases to be such by the change of persons.
91. The Same, Opinions.
Paulus holds that where a son who declines to accept the estate of his father
is proved to have purchased the said estate by the intervention of anyone, he
can be sued by the creditors of the estate, just as if he had taken upon
himself the management of it.
92. The Same, Opinions, Book XVII.
A son under paternal control married; and his wife died leaving children; and
the latter entered upon the estate of their mother, by order of their father,
and not by that of their grandfather. I ask whether the estate is acquired by
the grandfather? Paulus answers that, in accordance with the case stated, the
act is void.
93. The Same, Decisions, Book III.
Every time that a father directs his son to enter upon an estate, he must be
certain whether his son is an heir to a portion, or to the whole of it; and
also whether his right is derived from an appointment as heir, or from
substitution, or by virtue of a will, or through
intestacy.
(1) Where the father or the master is dumb, the better opinion is, that if a
son or a slave has been appointed heir, he can, by a nod,
direct him to enter upon the estate; provided he has sufficient intelligence to
enable him to legally acquire the estate, which can be the more readily
ascertained if he knows how to write.
(2) A slave who is dumb, and acts in the capacity of heir by the direction of
his master, renders the latter liable for the debts of the estate.
94. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book III.
He who refuses to accept the property of a person who is living is not
forbidden to enter upon his estate, or demand praetorian possession of it after
his death.
95. Paulus, Decisions, Book IV.
An estate can be rejected not only by words, but also by any act or other
indication of the will.
96. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book III.
Where anyone, erroneously supposing himself to be a minor, when, in fact, he
has arrived at puberty, acts as an heir, his rights will not be prejudiced by a
mistake of this kind.
97. Paulus, Decrees, Book III.
Clodius Clodianus, having made a will, afterwards appointed the same heir by
another will, which was drawn up in such a way as to be of no force or effect.
The appointed heir, thinking that the second will was valid, desired to enter
upon the estate by virtue of it, but it was afterwards ascertained to be void.
Papinianus held that he had rejected the estate granted by the former will, and
could not accept it under the second. I held that he did not reject the first
will, as he thought that the second was valid. It was finally decided that
Clodianus died intestate.
98. Scaevola, Digest, Book XXVI.
A certain woman promised Sempronius in the name of her granddaughter, whom she
had by Seiua, her daughter, a sum of money by way of dowry, and paid him a
certain amount as interest for household expenses. She then died, Seia being
her heir, together with others, against whom Sempronius brought an action, and
the different heirs were held liable for their shares of the estate, among whom
was Seia, who, with the rest gave security to Sempronius that they would pay
the sum for which each one of them had had judgment rendered against him or
her, with the same interest which had been paid by the testatrix for the
support of the family. Afterwards, the other heirs, with the exception of Seia,
rejected the estate through the indulgence of the Emperor, and it was entirely
vested in Seia. I ask whether a praetorian action should be granted against
Seia, who was now the sole heir, and as such administered all the affairs of
the estate, to recover the amount of the shares of those who, through the
indulgence of the Emperor, had been able to reject the estate. The answer is
that actions involving the shares of those who decline to accept an estate
are usually granted against the party who accepts the same, and prefers to
discharge the liabilities of the entire estate.
99. Pomponius, Decrees of the Senate, Book I.
Aristo stated, with reference to the Decrees of Fronto: Two daughters were the
necessary heirs of their father; one of them declined to accept his estate, and
the other took possession of her father's property and was ready to discharge
all its liabilities. The venerable Praetor Cassius, after hearing the case, very
properly decided that praetorian actions should be granted to her who had
accepted the estate of her father, but should be denied to the other daughter
who had refused it.
TITLE III.
IN WHAT WAY WILLS SHOULD BE OPENED, EXAMINED, AND COPIED.
1. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XVII.
The Praetor promises that he will grant the privilege of examining and copying a
will to all who desire to inspect one or copy it. It is plain that he will
grant this permission to anyone who desires it either in his own name or in
that of another.
(1) The reason for the adoption of this Edict is plain; for one cannot, without
judicial authority, carry out the provisions of a will, nor can the truth be
ascertained by the court in those controversies which arise out of the
interpretations of wills, except by the examination and investigation of the
language contained therein.
(2) Where anyone refuses to acknowledge his seal, this does not prevent the
opening of a will, but it becomes suspicious for this reason.
2. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book L.
The instrument containing the provisions of the will does not belong to one
person, that is to say, to the heir, but it is the property of all those to
whom anything has been bequeathed; and, indeed, it is rather a public document.
(1) That is properly said to be a will which is legally perfect; however, we
also improperly call certain papers wills which are forged, illegal, void, or
broken, and we are also accustomed to designate as wills such as are defective.
(2) It is held that whatever has been done with reference to a will is subject
to the same rules as the will itself, no matter upon what material it has been
written; provided that it contains the last wishes of the deceased, and the
will itself, as well as the substitution, is embraced in the Edict.
(3) Where anyone desires to produce several wills, authority to produce them
all should be granted.
(4) If any doubt should exist whether the person whose will someone desires to
have examined or copied is living or dead, it must be held that the Praetor
shall decide this after proper investigation, so
that if it is proved that the testator is living, he shall not permit the will
to be examined; otherwise, he can allow the applicant to examine the writing,
the seals, and anything else belonging to the instrument which he may desire to
inspect.
(5) The examination of a will also includes the perusal of the same.
(6) The Praetor does not permit the date of the will or the name of the Consul
under whose administration it was drawn up to be copied or examined, in order
to avoid opportunity for fraud; for even the examination of these may furnish
material for the perpetration of forgery.
(7) Can the Praetor order that power to examine or copy a will be accorded
without delay, or shall he grant time for its production to the person having
possession of the same if he wishes it? The better opinion is that he should
grant a certain time, dependent upon the difficulty of communication, and the
distance of the place.
(8) If anyone does not deny that he has possession of a will, but will not
allow it to be examined and copied, he should, by all means, be compelled to do
so. If, however, he denies that the will is in his possession, it must be said
that recourse should be had to the interdict which provides for the production
of wills.
3. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XVII.
The heir is, nevertheless, entitled to an action for the recovery of the will,
just as for property belonging to the estate, and on this account he can bring
an action to compel the production of the will.
4. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book L.
When the will is about to be opened, it is the duty of the Praetor to require
the witnesses to appear and acknowledge their seals,
5. Paulus, On Plautius, Book VIII.
Or deny that they have sealed the will; for it is expedient that the last will
of men should be carried into effect.
6. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book L.
If the majority of the witnesses are found, the will can be opened and read in
their presence.
7. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII.
If one of the witnesses should be absent, the will must be sent to him wherever
he may be, in order that he may acknowledge his seal. For it would be a
hardship to compel him to return for this purpose, as frequently it causes
great inconvenience for us to be taken from our business under such
circumstances; and it would be unjust for anyone to suffer injury for having
performed his duty. Nor does it make any difference whether one or all of the
witnesses are absent.
If all of them should happen to be absent, and, for some cause or other, there
is an urgent necessity for opening the will, the Proconsul
should take care that it is opened in the presence of men of excellent
reputation; and after it has been copied and examined in their presence, it
must be sealed by the same parties before whom it was opened, and then sent to
the place where the witnesses are, in order that they may acknowledge their
seals.
8. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book L.
The Praetor does not permit the opening of a pupillary will, even if there is no
endorsement on it forbidding this to be done; still, if the testator left his
will partially sealed, the Praetor can allow it to be opened, if proper cause be
shown.
9. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XLV.
Where a woman is placed in praetorian possession of an estate in the name of her
unborn child, the pupillary will should be opened, in order that it may be
ascertained to whom the curatorship of the child was entrusted.
10. Ulpianus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book XIII.
Where there are two copies of a will, and one of them remains unsealed, the
will is held to be opened.
(1) Where the will itself is unsealed, there is no doubt that it should be
considered as opened; for we do not inquire by whom it is to be opened.
(2) If a will should not be produced, or has been burned, it follows that
relief should be granted to the legatees; and the same rule applies where the
will has been suppressed, or concealed.
11. Gaius, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book XL
Just as a codicil is considered to be part of a will, so a pupillary
substitution is also held to constitute a part of the same.
12. Ulpianus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book XIII.
Where anyone makes a will and also a copy of it, and the copy is open, the will
is not considered to be open; but when the original will is open, everything
else is likewise.
TITLE IV.
WHERE ANYONE, THROUGH THE REJECTION OF HIS APPOINTMENT AS TESTAMENTARY HEIR,
OBTAINS POSSESSION OF THE ESTATE THROUGH INTESTACY OR IN ANY OTHER WAY.
1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book L.
The Praetor attempts to carry out the wishes of deceased persons, and opposes
the cunning of those who, by refusing to take under the will, obtain possession
of the estate, or a portion of the same, on the ground of intestacy; in order
to defraud legatees to whom something
may be due under the will of the decedent, if the estate should not be obtained
ab intestato; and he promises to grant an action against them.
(1) It makes little difference whether the party in question acquires the
estate himself, or through someone else; for in whatever way he may be able to
do so, if he does not acquire it under the will, he is in a position to be
affected by the Edict of the Praetor.
(2) An heir is held to have omitted to take advantage of the benefits granted
him by will, who, when he can order someone to enter upon the estate, declines
to do so.
(3) But what if his slave, when ordered to enter upon the estate, after
receiving the order should not obey it? The slave, however, can be compelled to
do this, and therefore his master comes within the scope of the Edict.
(4) If, however, the master has not been informed by his slave of his
appointment as heir, and he himself afterwards obtains possession of the estate
on the ground of intestacy; he will not be liable under the Edict, unless he
pretends ignorance of the facts.
(5) Where the proposed case is, that the same party was, at the same time,
appointed heir and substituted, and neglected to take advantage of his
appointment; the question arises whether he comes within the scope of the
Edict. I do not think that he does, as the testator who appointed him as
substitute for himself granted him the privilege of rejection.
(6) Where anyone rejects an estate, he forfeits any rights to which he may be
entitled under the will.
(7) Where children subject to the authority of their father immediately become
heirs by his will, there is no reason why they cannot reject his estate. If,
however, they subsequently interfere with it, they are considered to be heirs
by virtue of the will, unless they refrain from taking under it, and claim
possession of the property on the ground of intestacy; for, in this instance,
they come within the terms of the Edict.
(8) Where an heir is appointed under a condition, and being able to comply with
it, does not do so, when the condition is such that it depends upon the consent
of the said heir, and he afterwards obtains possession of the estate on the
ground of intestacy, he should be held liable under the Edict; for the reason
that a conditional appointment of this kind should be considered as an absolute
one.
(9) When parties who have refused to take under the will obtain an estate on
the ground of intestacy, we do not inquire whether they have acquired
possession of the same as heirs-at-law or not, for by whatever title they may
acquire possession of the estate, or a portion of it, they can be sued under
the Edict, provided they do not acquire it on some other ground; for instance,
where anyone rejects an estate and acquires it by means of a trust, and is
placed in possession for the purpose of discharging the trust; or if you should
state that be obtained possession in order to preserve a claim; as, in this
instance, he cannot be compelled to answer in a suit brought by the legatees.
Therefore, the Edict of the Praetor will apply whenever any one holds possession
as an heir-at-law, or acquires the estate on the ground
of intestacy, or holds it as a depredator, pretending that he has some title to
possession on the ground of intestacy; for no matter in what way he may be
pecuniarily benefited by obtaining the estate, he must pay the legacies.
(10) Security, however, must be furnished by the legatees, that in case the
heir should be deprived of the estate by a better title the legacies shall be
repaid to him; and even if the party may not have the estate in his possession,
but has acted in bad faith to avoid being in possession, the result is that he
will be held liable, just as if he had entered upon the estate.
(11) A person is considered to have acted in bad faith to avoid being in
possession, who fraudulently transfers possession to someone else, in order
that the legatees and others who have received anything under the will may be
deprived of whatever was bequeathed to them.
(12) The question was asked whether anyone should not be held to have acted in
bad faith who, in order to avoid being in possession, fraudulently relinquished
it after having held it for some time; or whether he is also liable who did
this maliciously to avoid obtaining possession in the first place.
Labeo says that it seems to him that he who avoided obtaining possession in the
first place is not less guilty than he who fraudulently relinquishes it, after
having obtained it. This is one prevalent opinion.
(13) Where anyone fraudulently rejects an estate in order that it may descend
to the heir-at-law, he will be liable to an action brought by the legatees.
2. The Same, On Sabinus, Book VII.
Although he who relinquishes an estate in consideration of the payment of a sum
of money may not be considered to have assumed the part of an heir, an action
should, nevertheless, be granted against him, as in the case of a party who,
having declined to take an estate under a will, obtains possession of it on the
ground of intestacy, as the Divine Hadrian stated in a Rescript. For this
reason he will be liable to be sued by the legatees and other beneficiaries of
the estate.
(1) But should the action be brought against him in the beginning, and recourse
then be had to the heir; or shall we change the order? The more equitable
opinion seems to me to be that proceedings should first be instituted against
the possessor of the estate, especially if the possession of the same is
profitable to him.
3. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book III.
If you receive money from a substitute in consideration of your relinquishing
your claim to an estate, and he enters upon the same, it may be doubted whether
an action should be granted to the legatees. I think that if the substitute
should also relinquish his claim for the reason that the estate vests in him by
law, and he obtains possession of it, both of you will be liable; and an action
will be granted in favor of him to whom a legacy has been bequeathed, against
whichever one of you he may elect to sue.
4. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book L.
In case the heir should not receive any money, but refuses to take under the
will, because he desires to confer a favor either on the substitute, or the
heir-at-law, will there be ground for the application of the Edict? It would be
intolerable for him to be able to prevent the execution of the will of the
deceased; and therefore if it is clearly established that this was done for the
purpose of injuring the legatees --- even
though no money was received but the act was prompted by excessive partiality ---
it must be said that there will be ground for an equitable action against the
party who is in possession of the estate.
(1) It is very properly held that whenever anyone wishes to confer a favor upon
another who will become the heir by his rejection of the estate, and he would
not have rejected it unless he had intended to confer the favor, and especially
if he did so for the purpose of preventing the execution of the will, it must,
in this instance, be said that an action will lie against the possessor of the
estate, with this distinction, however, that where money having been accepted,
the heir rejected the estate, we can, under these circumstances, say that suit
should be brought against him; but where he acted through partiality and for
the purpose of defrauding those to whom something was bequeathed, the possessor
of the estate should be sued in a praetorian action.
(2) Although the Praetor seems to refer to appointed heirs, still, this
provision also extends to others; for instance, where there is a legatee who
has been charged with a trust, and he causes the estate to be rejected through
his fraudulent act, suit should be brought against him.
(3) Where anyone sells his right to an estate, he is held to remain in
possession of the same, and not to have acted fraudulently in order to avoid
being in possession.
5. Marcellus, Digest, Book XII.
A patron is held to be excused who rejects an appointment as heir, when he has
been appointed heir by his freedman in a different way than he ought to have
been. For if his slave should have been appointed sole heir to an estate, and
on account of some accident was not able to enter upon it by order of his
master, he can, with impunity, decline to accept the estate given him by the
will.
6. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book L.
For the reason that a party who is in possession of an estate on the ground of
intestacy can be sued if he relinquishes his rights under the will, the
question arose whether he can be compelled to make payment if he seems to have
relinquished them in compliance with the wishes of the testator. For example, a
man appointed a brother his heir, and then executed a codicil requesting his
brother, if the estate should come to him by law, to discharge a trust in favor
of certain individuals; and therefore it should be considered, he having
renounced his rights under the will and obtained possession of the estate on
the ground of intestacy, whether he will be liable to the legatees.
Julianus states, in the Thirty-first Book of the Digest, that he can be
compelled in the first place to pay the legacies, and afterwards, they having
been settled, should anything be remaining from the three-fourths of the
estate, he can be required to discharge the trust. If, however, the legacies
exhaust three-fourths of the estate, then nothing shall be paid under the
trust, for the heir-at-law must have the fourth undiminished. Hence the order
was established by Julianus that the legacies should first be discharged, and
the trusts paid out of the remainder, with the understanding that the fourth
should remain intact.
I think that the opinion of Julianus should be adopted, so that if the estate
was rejected under the will, in order that it might be obtained ab intestato,
the party ought by all means to be compelled to pay the legacies, for the
reason that the testator who left him the trust to be discharged in case the
succession was intestate did not authorize him to reject the estate under such
circumstances.
(1) If, however, it is evident that the testator expressly authorized him to do
this, he will not become liable under the Edict, because he availed himself of
the privilege which the testator granted him. But if the testator did not under
the will specifically grant him the privilege of rejecting the estate, the
order prescribed by Julianus should be followed.
(2) But what shall we say where legacies are left by will, and trusts in case
of intestacy, to the same person, and, in addition to this, trusts are left to
other parties? Shall we follow the same order established by Julianus, or shall
we subject all the trustees to contribution as if they were equal? The better
opinion is to ascertain whether it makes much difference if the heir becomes
liable under the Edict, or not; for if he does become liable, those are to be
preferred to whom something was left by the will; but if he does not, as it was
the wish of the testator to grant him the privilege of succeeding ab intestato,
or because he was admitted for some other reason, which, in accordance with
what we have above stated, is not in violation of the Edict, it must be said
that all the trusts ought to contribute as if they had all been placed on the
same footing.
(3) The Praetor does not promise to grant the action indiscriminately, but only
where proper cause is shown; for if he should ascertain that the testator was
the author of this arrangement, and himself had permitted the heir to succeed
ab intestato, or if he should find that there was any other good reason for the
rejection of the estate, he will not grant the legatees an action against him.
(4) Also if the Praetor should ascertain that the property belongs to another,
he will not grant an action, provided no suspicion of collusion influences the
decision of the Praetor.
(5) Where, however, the person who can be deprived of the estate has in his
possession any portion of the same, and relinquishes possession of it without
being guilty of fraud, the better opinion is that he ceases to be liable to be
sued.
(6) What time then shall we consider, when investigating as to whether he is in
possession or not? The time when issue was joined should be considered.
(7) It is evident that where anyone is in possession of the property of an
unclaimed estate, and that the term of four years has elapsed, suit can
undoubtedly be brought against him, under this Section of the Edict, both for
the reason that he refused to take under the will and because he is in
possession on the ground of intestacy, and, indeed, as he is rendered safe by
prescription on account of the expiration of four years.
(8) Where a patron is appointed heir to the share of an estate to which he is
entitled, and a co-heir is appointed with him, and he rejects the appointment
for his share, because what is due to him has been already exhausted, and the
co-heir also rejects his portion; and then the patron obtains possession of the
entire estate ab intestato, by operation of law; Celsus says in the Sixteenth
Book of the Digest that the same action should be granted against him which
could have been brought against his co-heir Titius, and that it will be
sufficient for the patron to have for himself the entire share to which he was
legally entitled.
This, however, is correct only where the co-heir is in collusion with the
patron, for otherwise, the latter cannot be compelled to pay the legacies, as
it is not forbidden for anyone to refuse an estate, if he does so without being
guilty of fraud.
(9) The better opinion is, that this Edict also applies to the praetorian
possession of an estate contrary to the provisions of the will, so that, where
a party, by taking possession of the estate in opposition to the will, must pay
the legacies to the children, and the parents, and if he should fail to obtain
possession of the estate, and should acquire possession of it on the ground of
intestacy, he can be compelled to pay whatever he would have paid if he had
obtained possession of the estate in opposition to the will.
(10) Where freedom has been given to a slave on the condition of his paying ten
aurei, and his rights under the will are relinquished by the heir, the slave
will not be liberated unless the condition is complied with.
7. Marcellus, Digest, Book XII.
A certain man appointed Titius and Maevius his heirs, and bequeathed a hundred
aurei to Titius, and both of them relinquished their rights under the will, and
entered upon the estate as heirs-at-law. Titius cannot properly bring an action
to recover his legacy.
The same rule will apply where the testator bequeathed legacies to both the
heirs.
8. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book L.
Where a person becomes an heir under the condition of paying ten aurei, or
under any other condition which consists of either giving or doing something,
and the heir, having relinquished his rights under the will, obtains possession
of the estate on the ground of intestacy, it should be considered whether or
not relief should be granted to him for whose benefit the condition was
imposed. The better opinion is that he is not entitled to relief, for he is not
a legatee.
9. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XLV.
But if the parties still have time to comply with the condition, he will not be
liable under this section of the Edict.
10. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book L.
Where he who has relinquished his rights under the will is not alone, but
together with another party has possession of the estate, Julianus very
properly says, and his opinion is approved by Marcellus, that an equitable
action should also be granted against him in favor of the legatees, for he
ought not to object because the act of the appointed heir prejudices him, since
he also profited by it. This, however, is correct where the person who
relinquishes his rights under the will did not receive any money for doing so,
for he will then be liable for the entire
amount.
(1) Where legacies have been left to be discharged by appointed heirs in favor
of substitutes, and the said appointed heirs as well as the substitutes have
obtained possession of the estate on the ground of intestacy, after their
rights under the will have been relinquished by them, the Divine Pius stated in
a Rescript that the appointed heirs can honorably refuse to pay the legacies
bequeathed to the substitutes; for they may very properly refuse to pay any
legacy or trust to a substitute who claims it, if he was free to enter upon the
estate, and to obtain all the property belonging to it without demanding the
discharge of the
trust.
(2) Where there are two heirs, one of whom was appointed and the other
substituted, and both of them having relinquished their rights under the will
obtain possession of the estate ab intestato; the question arises whether both
of them can be compelled to pay the legacies, and whether each one of them is
obliged to pay those legacies, with which he was charged, or whether both of
them should pay the
legacies together.
I think an action should be granted in favor of the legatees against each one
of them, for the payment of all the legacies; but let us consider whether each
one is obliged to pay the legacies with which he himself was charged, or also
those with which the other heir was charged. Let us also suppose that the
appointed heir alone was in possession of the estate: will he be liable to an
action for the payment of the legacies with which he was charged, or will he be
also responsible for those with which the substitute was charged?
It must be held that he will only be liable for the legacies with which the
substitute was charged in case the estate should come into the hands of the
heirs appointed under the will, on account of the bad faith of the substitute,
where no money was paid; for if the substitute received any money, he himself
should be sued.
Moreover, if the substitute alone is in possession of the estate, and the
appointed heir should reject it in consideration of having received a sum of
money, we say that he will be liable to his legatees, and the substitute to his
own; but where no money has been paid, we will grant an action against the
substitute. If, however, both parties are in pos-
session, the better opinion is that each one will be liable to his respective
legatees.
11. Javolenus, Epistles, Book VII.
Where the same property has been bequeathed to me to be delivered by both the
appointed and the substituted heirs, and they, having relinquished their rights
under the will, have possession of the estate by operation of law, the entire
legacy is due to me from both of them; still, if I have obtained it from one, I
cannot collect it from the other, hence I can proceed against whichever one of
them I choose.
12. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book L.
The question also arose in this case with respect to grants of freedom, whether
it was proper that they should be conferred by both of the heirs, when the one
appointed as well as the substitute were charged with their execution.
The better opinion is that both those which were direct and those which were
granted in trust become operative.
(1) It is established that the heir of anyone who relinquished his rights under
a will in order to obtain possession of the estate on the ground of intestacy
is liable in an action brought by the legatees to recover the entire amount;
for the proceeding rather has reference to the recovery of the property than
the penalty, and therefore the action is a perpetual one. This, however, will
not be the case if the heir is sued on account of the bad faith of the
deceased, for then an action can be brought against him for the property which
came into his hands.
13. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XVII.
Even if the heir should not come into possession of the entire estate, or a
large portion of the same on the ground of intestacy, but only of a very small
part of that for which he was appointed, and also where he only holds a single
article belonging to it, he will be liable under this Edict.
14. The Same, Concerning Testaments; On the Edict of the Urban Praetor, Book II.
Even though, properly speaking, a single article is not understood to be part
of an estate.
15. The Same, On the Provincial Edict, Book XVII.
For this is not unjust, since the person suffers this inconvenience through his
own fault,
16. The Same, Concerning Testaments; On the Edict of the Urban Praetor, Book II.
For since an estate can be claimed on the ground of hereditary right by a
party, who is in possession of a single article belonging to it, it cannot be
doubted that what we have stated is true.
17. The Same, On the Provincial Edict, Book XVII.
If anyone, having relinquished his rights under the will, should not be in
possession of the entire estate, the legatees are excluded; for
everyone should be free to reject even a profitable inheritance, even though in
this way legacies and grants of freedom may be annulled. It has been provided,
however, with reference to estates bequeathed in trust, that if the appointed
heir should decline to accept the estate, he can be compelled to do so by order
of the Praetor, and to surrender it to the beneficiaries of the trust; but this
advantage is not enjoyed by those to whom separate articles have been
bequeathed by way of trust, any more than it is by legatees.
18. The Same, Concerning Testaments; On the Edict of the Urban Praetor, Book II.
Where two appointed heirs, both having relinquished their rights under the
will, obtain possession of an estate on the ground of intestacy, then, in
accordance with the Praetorian Law, both will be considered as having entered
upon the estate under the will, and an action will lie against each of them for
his respective share.
(1) We should note that the benefit of the Lex Falcidia must be accorded to the
heir against whom an action is granted in favor of the legatees by this section
of the Edict.
19. The Same; On the Provincial Edict, Book XVII.
Moreover, where a patron has been appointed heir to the whole estate, and by
renouncing his rights under the will obtains possession ab intestato, he should
always be entitled to the benefit of the share which is due to him, and which
he would have obtained if he had entered upon the estate by virtue of the will.
20. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book IV.
Where the same property was left to different persons, and both the appointed
heir and the substitute were charged with its delivery, both of said legatees
are not entitled to recovery, but only the one who received it from the
appointed heir.
21. Julianus, Digest, Book XXVII.
If my son should be appointed heir by his mother, and I, having relinquished my
testamentary rights, demand possession of the estate in the name of my said
son, an action in favor of the legatees should be granted against me, just as
if I myself had been appointed the heir, and, having relinquished my rights
under the will, had obtained possession of the property of the estate on the
ground of intestacy.
22. The Same, Digest, Book XXXI.
Where the following provision was inserted into a will: "Let Titius be my heir,
and if Titius becomes my heir, let Maevius become my heir"; and Titius, having
relinquished his testamentary rights, obtains possession of the estate as heir-
at-law, the petition to recover the estate should not be granted against him in
favor of Maevius for the share of the estate to which he would have been
entitled, if Titius had not relinquished his hereditary rights. For, as the
heir obtains possession of
the estate when testamentary rights are relinquished, the legacies and grants
of freedom must be taken into account, since otherwise they cannot be granted
except by the heir. The Praetor, however, cannot intervene where an estate is
disposed of in this way, for the testator is to blame for having bequeathed a
part of it under such a condition, when he could have bequeathed it absolutely.
(1) Wherefore, if the following provision was inserted into a will: "Let Titius
be my heir, and if any of the above-mentioned persons whom I have appointed
becomes my heir, let Stichus be free and my heir", and Titius having
relinquished his rights under the will obtains possession of the estate, the
Praetor cannot assure Stichus of his freedom, nor can he grant him an action for
the recovery of the estate.
(2) Where anyone draws up a will as follows: "Let Titius be my heir, and if
Titius should not become my heir, let Maevius be my heir, and if any of the
heirs whom I have previously appointed becomes my heir, I bequeath a hundred
aurei to Maevius, if he should not become my heir". Titius relinquished his
rights under the will and obtained possession of the estate by operation of
law, and the question arises whether an action for the recovery of the estate
should be granted to Maevius, in whose power it was to acquire it all by
entering upon the same by virtue of the substitution. It was decided that
Maevius would be entitled to the action, because nothing prevented him from
having a good reason for not involving himself in the affairs of the estate.
23. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XLVI.
Where a son, who is under the control of his father, and also a daughter were
appointed heir, an emancipated brother, having been passed over, obtained
possession of the estate in opposition to the will. By this means the heirs
acquired the estate of their father on the ground of intestacy, and paid all
the legacies. The daughter, however, did not divide her dowry with her brother,
as she was held to be entitled to her share of the estate as an appointed heir.
24. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LX.
Where a ward relinquishes his testamentary rights through the fraudulent
representations of his guardian, and obtains the estate as heir-at-law, actions
to recover the legacies should be granted against the ward, but only to the
extent that the estate had been acquired by him. But what if he had obtained
possession of the estate along with another?
(1) Many authorities think that this rule should be observed only with
reference to a youth who has arrived at puberty, and that he should only be
liable for the share of the estate in his possession; even though the Praetor
grants an action against him just as if he had entered upon the estate.
25. Celsus, Digest, Book XVI.
A man for whom his own slave was substituted ordered him to enter upon the
estate. If he did this for the purpose of avoiding payment of the legacies, he
shall pay them all, both for the reason that he is the
heir, and because having relinquished his rights under the will he has
possession of the estate by virtue of the substitution, with the exception of
the portion reserved by the Falcidian Law.
26. Papinianus, Questions, Book XVI.
Julianus says that where a father ordered his daughter, who had been appointed
a substitute for himself, to accept an estate; he will, by the terms of the
Edict, be compelled to pay the legacies with which he was charged, since his
daughter was substituted instead of her father, and the latter was not given
the right of choice. Where, however, the different legacies amount to more than
three-quarters of the estate, an account must be taken, in the first place, of
those with which the daughter was charged, for fraud will be imputed to the
father, if, having rejected the honor conferred upon him, he prefers the
appointment of another as heir, on account of the benefit which may accrue to
him therefrom.
(1) Julianus thinks that if a father who is substituted for his daughter enters
upon an estate, he will not be guilty of bad faith, for no one is considered to
have substituted a father for his daughter against the will of the parent, but
in order that he might have the power of making his choice.
27. The Same, Opinions, Book VI.
Where a mother is substituted for her son under the age of puberty, there is
ground for the application of the Edict, if, having relinquished her
testamentary rights, she obtains possession of the estate of her son by
operation of law. The same rule applies if she should be appointed the heir and
also the substitute of her son.
(1) A brother is not considered to come within the terras of the Edict, so far
as the legacies are concerned, who did not emancipate his son who had been
substituted for a boy under the age of puberty by the will of his brother; but
he will obtain possession of the property of the estate through him on the
ground of intestacy.
(2) An action in favor of the legatees will be granted by the decree of the
Praetor against a party who was not appointed testamentary heir, if he
participated in a fraudulent agreement with the appointed heirs in order to
obtain sole possession of the estate by operation of law.
28. Marcianus, Trusts, Book IV.
Where a master sells a slave whom he had appointed his heir, and who himself
had been charged with a trust, and he does this before he orders him to enter
upon the estate, he should discharge the trust, because by obtaining the price
of the slave he also obtained the value of
the estate.
(1) Where a party is appointed heir and is requested to deliver the estate, and
having relinquished his testamentary rights, obtains possession of the estate
by operation of law, there is no doubt that he can be compelled to surrender
the estate, and also the legacies and
other property left in trust, as well as execute any grants of freedom direct,
as well as indirect. Where, however, he is charged to manumit slaves belonging
to others, he should redeem them, and he to whom the estate was surrendered, as
well as he who surrenders it, must both share the loss.
29. Ulpianus, Trusts, Book V.
Where anyone, having relinquished his rights under the will, obtains possession
of an estate on the ground of intestacy, he must bestow freedom on the slaves,
nor can this act of him who declines to take under the will injure them, as
they become his freedmen.
30. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book III.
Where an heir, having relinquished his rights under the will, obtains
possession of the estate as a purchaser, or on account of a dowry, or by way of
donation, or by any other title except that of heir or possessor, he will not
be liable to an action brought by the legatees.





TITLE V.
CONCERNING THE SILANIAN AND CLAUDIAN DECREES OF THE SENATE BY THE PROVISIONS OF
WHICH WILLS CANNOT BE OPENED.


1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXX.
As no household can be safe unless slaves are compelled, under peril of their
lives, to protect their masters, not only from persons belonging to his family,
but also from strangers, certain decrees of the Senate were enacted with
reference to putting to public torture all the slaves belonging to a household
in case of the violent death of their master.
(1) A person is included in the appellation of master who possesses the
ownership of the slaves, even though the usufruct of the same may belong to
another.
(2) Where anyone is in possession of a slave in good faith, but who is, in
fact, free, he is not included in the appellation of master; nor is he, either,
who has only the usufruct of a slave.
(3) A slave given by way of pledge is, so far as the death of the debtor is
concerned, in every respect considered as if he had not been pledged.
(4) Those also are included in the appellation of slaves, who are bequeathed
under a certain condition; for in the meantime they belong to the heir, and as,
when the condition is fulfilled they cease to belong to him, it follows that
meanwhile they should not be held to constitute part of his property. The same
rule must be said to apply to the case of a slave who is to be free under a
certain condition.
(5) A Rescript of the Divine Pius to Jubentius Sabinus is extant which has
reference to a slave whose unconditional freedom was due under the terms of a
trust; from which it is evident that too much
haste should not be employed in the torture of a slave who is entitled to his
freedom under a trust, and the better opinion is that he should not be
punished, for the reason that he lives under the same roof with the testator,
unless he participated in the crime.
(6) It must be said that he who has only a share in the ownership of a slave is
also included in the appellation of master.
(7) Sons under paternal control, and other children who are in the power of
their father, are also included in the appellation of master; for the Silanian
Decree of the Senate not only refers to the heads of families, but also to the
children.
(8) But what shall we say if the children are not subject to the authority of
their father? Marcellus, in the Twelfth Book of the Digest, expresses
uncertainty on this point. I think that the most liberal construction should be
given to the Decree of the Senate, so that it may also include children who are
not under paternal control.
(9) We do not think that the Decree of the Senate is applicable to the case of
a son who has been given in adoption, even though it may apply to an adoptive
father.
(10) The Decree of the Senate does not apply where a youth who is being reared
is killed.
(11) Torture shall not be inflicted upon the slaves of a mother, where a son or
a daughter have been killed.
(12) Scaevola very properly says that where a father has been captured by the
enemy, and his son is killed, the slaves of the father should be put to the
torture and punished. He approves of this also being done, even after the death
of the father, if the son was killed before he became the proper heir.
(13) Scaevola also says that it may uniformly be maintained, where a son has
been appointed heir and is killed before entering upon the estate, that the
slaves can be put to the torture and punished, even if they have been
unconditionally bequeathed or manumitted. For although even if he had lived and
had become the heir, the slaves would not belong to him, therefore when he
died, as both the legacies and the grants of freedom will be extinguished, he
holds there is ground for the application of the Decree of the Senate.
(14) If the father is killed, should torture be inflicted upon the slaves of
the son, if they form part of the castrense peculium? The better opinion is
that the slaves of the son should be put to the torture, and subjected to
punishment, even though the son is not under the control of his father.
(15) In the case of murder of a man and his wife, torture should be inflicted
upon their slaves, although, properly speaking, the slaves of the husband do
not belong to the wife, nor her slaves to him, but, for the reason that the two
sets of slaves are commingled, and there is but one household, the Senate
decreed that punishment should be inflicted, just as if the slaves belonged
equally to both of them.
(16) But where the wife or the husband was killed, the Senate did not decree
that the slaves of the father-in-law should be put to the torture. Marcellus,
however, very properly says, in the Twelfth Book of
the Digest, that what has been determined with reference to the slaves of the
husband also applies to those of a father-in-law.
(17) Labeo states that those are understood to be included in the term "killed"
who have been put to death by violence, or murdered; for instance, by having
their throats cut, by being strangled, or thrown down from some height, or
struck with a stone or a club, or deprived of life by the use of any other kind
of weapon.
(18) Where a man is killed, for instance, by poison, or by some other agency
which it is customary to employ secretly, this Decree of the Senate will not
apply to the avenging of his death; for the reason that slaves are punished
whenever they do not assist their master against anyone who is guilty of
violence towards him, when they are able to do so. But what could they effect
against those who insidiously make use of poison or any other method of this
kind?
(19) It is evident that the Decree of the Senate will be applicable where
poison is forcibly administered.
(20) Therefore, whenever such force is employed as usually causes death, it
must be held that there is ground for the application of the Decree of the
Senate.
(21) But what if the master was killed by poison, and not by violence, will the
deed go unpunished? By no means. For although the Silinian Decree of the Senate
may not apply, nor torture and punishment be inflicted upon those who are under
the same roof, still, any who knew of the crime or were participants in it must
be subjected to punishment, and the estate can be entered upon, and the will
opened, even before torture is inflicted.
(22) Where a person lays violent hands upon himself, there is indeed no ground
for the application of the Decree of the Senate; still, his death should be
avenged. For example, if he committed the act in the presence of his slaves,
and they could have prevented it, they should be punished, but if they were
unable to prevent it, they will be free from liability.
(23) Where anyone lays violent hands upon himself, not through remorse for some
crime which he has committed, but through being weary of life, or unable to
suffer pain, the manner of his death does not prevent his will from being
opened and read.
(24) It should also be noted that, unless it is established that a man has been
killed, his slaves ought not to be tortured. Hence, it must positively be
ascertained that the party owed his death to crime, for the Decree of the
Senate to be applicable.
(25) We, however, understand the term torture to mean not merely being put to
the question, but every inquiry and defence that may be made in the
investigation of the death of the master.
(26) Again, this Decree of the Senate punishes, without exception, all those
slaves, "Who live under the same roof"; but such as are not under the same
roof, but in the same neighborhood, shall not be punished, unless they have
knowledge of the crime.
(27) Let us consider what must be understood by the term "under the same roof";
whether it means within the same walls, or outside,
within the same enclosure, within the same apartment, or the same house, or the
same garden, or the entire residence. Sextus says that it has often been
decided that wherever slaves were if they could have heard the voice of their
master, they shall be punished just as if they has been under the same roof;
although some persons have louder voices than others, and all cannot be heard
from the same place.
(28) With reference to this, it appears that the Divine Hadrian also stated the
following in a Rescript: "Whenever slaves can afford assistance to their
master, they should not prefer their own safety to his. Moreover, a female
slave who is in the same room with her mistress can give her assistance, if not
with her body, certainly by crying out, so that those who are in the house or
the neighbors can hear her; and this is evident even if she should allege that
the murderer threatened her with death if she cried out. She ought, therefore,
to undergo capital punishment, to prevent other slaves from thinking that they
should consult their own safety when their master is in danger."
(29) This Rescript contains many provisions, for it does not spare anyone who
is in the same room, and does not excuse a slave who fears death, and requires
slaves to summon aid to their masters by crying out.
(30) Where a master is killed while on one of his estates in the country, it
would be extremely unjust if all the slaves who are in that neighborhood should
be subjected to torture and punishment, if the said estate is very large. It
will then be sufficient for those to be put to the torture who were with him
when he was said to have been killed, and who appeared to be liable to
suspicion of having committed the murder, or of having knowledge of it.
(31) Where a master was murdered while on a journey, the slaves who were with
him at the time he lost his life, or those who had been with him and took to
flight, should be subjected to punishment. If, however, no one was with him at
the time he was killed, these Decrees of the Senate do not apply.
(32) A male or a female slave who has not yet reached the age of puberty is not
included in this category, for their age is deserving of excuse.
(33) Shall we grant a slave, who has not yet attained puberty, indulgence
merely with reference to punishment, or does this also relate to torture? The
better opinion is that torture should not be inflicted upon a slave under the
age of puberty; and, besides, it is the custom ordinarily observed that minors
shall not be put to the torture, but only be frightened, or be whipped with a
rod, or a leather thong.
(34) Slaves are excused who have obtained aid without fraudulent intent; for if
one should pretend to be of assistance, or should bring it merely for the sake
of appearance, this will be of no advantage to him.
(35) A slave is considered to have rendered assistance to his master not only
when he has preserved him from harm, that is to say, when he could have exerted
his power to the extent of saving him, but also when, although he did all that
he could, he was unable to prevent his
master from being killed; for example, where he cried out for the purpose of
obtaining aid, or frightened the persons who were attacking his master, or if
he assembled a crowd of people, or interposed his body between them and his
master, or afforded him protection in any other way by means of his body.
(36) A slave who cries out is not, however, always considered to have aided his
master; for what, if when he could have averted the danger from him, he chose
to cry out in vain? He should undoubtedly be punished.
(37) But what if the slaves should be wounded while they are protecting their
master? It must be said that they should be excused unless they inflicted
wounds upon themselves purposely in order to avoid being punished; or if they
did not receive wounds sufficiently serious to prevent them from still
assisting their master, if they had desired to do so.
(38) Where the master, being mortally wounded, survives for a certain time,
without complaining of any of his slaves, even if they should be under the same
roof with him, they must be spared.

2. Callistratus, Concerning Judicial Inquiries, Book V.
The Divine Marcus Commodus stated in a Rescript to Piso the following: "Since
it has been proved before you, my dear Piso, that Julius Donatus, after having
been alarmed by the approach of robbers, took refuge in his country-house, and
was wounded, and afterwards, having executed a will, manifested his affection
for his slaves, neither his regard for them, nor the solicitude of the heir
should allow punishment to be inflicted upon those whom the master himself has
absolved".

3. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book L.
Where a slave who was suffering from serious illness could not render his
master assistance, he must be granted relief.
(1) If anyone while dying says that he was killed by his slave, it must be held
that the master should not be believed, if he made this statement at the point
of death, unless it can otherwise be proved.
(2) If a husband should kill his wife, or a wife should kill her husband at
night, while they were together in their bedroom, the slaves will not be liable
to punishment under the Decree of the Senate; but if they heard cries, and did
not render assistance, they shall be punished, not only if they belong to the
wife, but also if they belong to the husband.
(3) Where, however, a husband kills his wife caught in the act of adultery; for
the reason that he himself is excused, it must be held that his slaves, as well
as those of his wife, are free from liability, if they did not resist their
master while seeking just reparation for a grievance.
(4) Where several masters, owning a slave in common, are attacked, and the
slave only assists one of them, shall he be excused, or, indeed, shall he be
punished for not assisting all of them? The better opinion is, that he should
be subjected to punishment, if he could have
assisted all of them, but only assisted one. If, however, he could not assist
all at the same time, he must be excused, because he only afforded aid to one,
for it would be harsh to claim that where a slave could not protect two of his
masters, that he was guilty of crime for having chosen to protect but one of
them.
(5) Wherefore, if a slave belonging to the wife should assist her husband
rather than his mistress, or vice versa, it must be said that he ought to be
excused.
(6) Those slaves must be excused who, at the time their master or mistress was
killed, were shut up without bad faith on their part, so that they could not
break out for the purpose of rendering assistance, or of seizing those who
committed the murder. Nor does it make any difference by whom they were shut
up, provided this was not done on purpose to prevent them from bringing aid. We
understood the term "shut up" also to mean where they are bound, provided they
have been bound in such a way that they cannot release themselves, and render
assistance.
(7) Those also are excused who are incapacitated on account of age.
(8) A deaf slave also should be included among those who are infirm, or who do
not live under the same roof; because as the latter cannot hear anything on
account of the distance, so the former can hear nothing on account of his
affliction.
(9) A blind slave also deserves to be excused.
(10) We must likewise except a dumb slave, but only where he could render aid
by means of his voice.
(11) There is no doubt whatever that slaves who are insane should be excepted.
(12) Where anyone knowingly receives, or conceals through fraud a male or a
female slave who belonged to the deceased, and who is liable to punishment on
account of not having assisted him when the crime was committed, he is in the
same position as if he had been guilty of the crime as prescribed by the law
enacted with reference to assassins.
(13) Where a slave is due by reason of a stipulation, and discloses who
committed the murder of his master, and on this account is directed to be free
by way of reward, an action based on the stipulation shall not be granted to
the stipulator, for it would not be granted if the slave had been subjected to
punishment. Where, however, the slave did not live under the same roof with his
master, an equitable action based on the stipulation will be granted to the
creditor to recover the estimated value of the slave.
(14) But does this only apply to a slave who seems to have indicated or proved
who committed the crime, if he did this voluntarily; or shall he also be
included who, when he was accused, threw the responsibility of the crime upon
another? The better opinion is, that he is entitled to the reward who
voluntarily came forward with the accusation.
(15) Those slaves also, who otherwise would be unable to obtain their freedom,
for instance, where they have been sold on condition that they will never be
manumitted, can become free by an act of this kind, because it is conducive to
the public welfare.
(16) Punishment must also be inflicted upon slaves who have been manumitted by
will, just as upon other slaves.
(17) Torture and punishment must also be inflicted upon any slaves who, before
the will of their murdered master or mistress has been opened, take to flight,
and who afterwards, when the will is opened are found to have been left their
freedom, just as upon other slaves. For it is perfectly just that the kindness
of their masters should not stand in the way of their being avenged, and the
more the slave has enjoyed their favor, the more serious punishment he deserves
for his crime.1
(18) It is provided by the Edict that where anything has been bequeathed by
will by the person who is said to have been killed, no one who is aware of this
shall open, read, or copy the will, before the slaves have been tortured and
punishment is inflicted upon the guilty, in compliance with the Decree of the
Senate; otherwise he will be guilty of bad faith.
1 Slavery, which existed at Rome from the earliest times, was alleged to have
been derived from three sources, captivity in war, birth, and punishment for
crime. The first of these, which probably dates back to the origin of the human
race, was authorized by the Law of Nations, and confirmed by the practice of
centuries; the second, based upon the well-known maxim, "Partus sequitur
ventrem", was said to be in accordance with the Law of Nature; the third, and
the only one now recognized by civilized peoples, was established by
legislative enactment for the restraint of malefactors, and as a penalty for
their violation of the laws. During the existence of the Republic and the reign
of the Caesars, the lot of the Roman slave was indeed a hard one. He was a mere
chattel, subject to the arbitrary caprices of his master who enjoyed, and
frequently exercised over him the right of life and death. While, by the
indulgence of the former, he was permitted to have a qualified ownership in the
peculium,, the privilege was precarious, and he was liable to be deprived of it
at any time.
Slaves were usually purchased at auction. When disposed of in this way
immediately after having been captured they were said to be sold sub hasta;
when they were offered at the nearest market-place sale was sub corona, or
"under the wreath", a garland being placed upon the head of each one before he
mounted the block. A general warranty against physical defects and bad habits
accompanied each slave; a card being suspended from his neck on which were
enumerated his imperfections, as well as his age and nationality. If he had
recently been brought from a foreign country, his feet were whitened with chalk
to indicate this fact.
With the progress of conquest, and the subjugation of many barbarian nations,
the number of slaves was enormously increased in Italy; and, more than once,
their power and insolence constituted a serious menace to the safety of the
State. The luxurious tastes and love of pomp of the Roman nobles were exhibited
in the size and splendid equipment of their vast retinues of slaves. Great
multitudes were employed in the cultivation of their estates. Ill breeding was
imputed to a Roman citizen if he did not have an immense body of personal
attendants and domestics in his familia, or household, when he could afford it.
Separate duties were imposed upon the latter, and there was one or more
destined for every imaginable kind of service. Where a single slave discharged
functions for which several usually were appointed it was considered an
evidence of parsimony which
(19) He is considered to have opened a will who opens it in the ordinary way,
whether it is sealed, or not fastened with a cord, but merely closed.
(20) We must understand the term "to open", to mean that we are forbidden to
open the will in the presence of anyone, or publicly, or secretly; for every
kind of opening is prohibited.
reflected upon the character and social position of the owner. Each class had
its own superintendent, or foreman, who assigned tasks to his subordinates, and
was responsible for their proper performance. Youthful slaves were carefully
educated by their masters to fill the positions of accountants, librarians,
stewards, secretaries, actors, copyists, physicians, and artisans of every
description. Many of them were afterwards hired out, in this way furnishing a
by no means inconsiderable source of revenue to their owners.
The inhumanity of many Roman slave-owners was proverbial. They frequently put
their helpless dependents to death by long, protracted torture. They abandoned
them to wild beasts, scourged, branded, and drowned them. One, for a pardonble
act of carelessness, had the offender thrown alive into the water to feed the
eels for his table. Another cast his slave bound hand and foot into a cauldron
of boiling oil. Criminal responsibility for homicide was entirely dependent
upon intent, which of course was difficult of proof.
In the later days of the Empire, the rights of masters were greatly restricted,
and the condition of slaves, to a considerable extent, was ameliorated.
Magistrates were directed to examine such as had sought sanctuary to escape
from intolerable persecution and atrocious acts of violence, and if their
complaints were well founded, to have them sold. In all the legislation of
Justinian respect for liberty is diligently inculcated, and whenever any doubt
exists as to the condition of anyone, the presumption is always in favor of his
freedom.
Many of the laws regulating slavery at Rome were borrowed from the Greeks, who,
however, as a rule, did not treat their slaves with such severity as the
Romans. The servile condition was much more general in Greece than in Italy,
for there were few citizens too poor not to possess at least one slave. In its
palmy days the slaves of Attica outnumbered the former four to one. The effect
of such a preponderance of men and women in bondage upon national enterprise
and industry, as well as upon public morals, was, of course, most disastrous.
The Helots of Sparta, while nominally serfs, and, in some instances, subjected
to the most rigorous servitude, were not so numerous in proportion to the
remainder of the population, and enjoyed more privileges than were accorded to
the members of their class by the Athenians. They served in the army, were
permitted to own property, and could not be separated from their families. The
laws of the Lacedaemonians, which treated the citizens with inexorable tyranny,
seems to have been much more indulgent to the slave. The proportion of slaves
was also very large in other states of Greece.
The Greeks did not regard liberty with the same favor as the Romans, and while
among the latter every encouragement was given to a master to liberate his
slaves, except when such an act might interfere with the course of public
justice, manumissions were rare and generally discountenanced by the Greeks.
In the laws of ancient Babylon so much space is devoted to fugitives as to
indicate that slaves were more in the habit of running away in that country
than elsewhere. Anyone who instigated or aided a slave to escape, or who
harbored him afterwards, was put to death. (The Code of Hammurabi, Secs. 15,
16, 19.) A slave could marry a free woman, and, in compliance with the ordinary
rule, his children were born free, but he could not leave them anything. If a
native slave was sold to a foreigner, he obtained his liberty as soon as the
fact became known. (Ibid. Sec. 280.)
Unlike most of the nations of antiquity, the Hebrews were allowed to enslave
their countrymen, but the duration of bondage was primarily limited to six
years;
(21) Where anyone who did not know of the murder opens a will he should not be
held liable under this Edict.
(22) And if he should be aware of the death of the testator, but does not open
the will in bad faith, he will also not be liable, or if he does this through
inexperience, or through rusticity is not aware of the existence of the Edict
of the Praetor, or the Decree of the Senate.
still, it could be extended for life with the consent of the slave. If he
married, his wife and children remained the property of his master at the
expiration of his term of servitude. A man reduced to poverty was authorized to
sell himself, or a parent could sell his child. (Exodus XXI, 2, 5, 6; Leviticus
XXV, 39, 47.) Slaves were, in every instance, considered as real property by
Jewish law. (Mishnah IX.) As they might be stolen, this is in direct
contravention of the modern principle that real-estate is not susceptible of
larceny.
Among Moslems, a slave is ordinarily regarded rather as a companion than a
dependent. Their laws on the subject of slavery are extremely humane and
merciful. They provide that captives taken in war should be fed and lodged as
friends and guests; and separation of families is not permitted. A slave who
voluntarily adopts the faith of Islam, on the field of battle, ipso facto, at
once becomes free; if, however, it is done subsequently, he does not enjoy this
privilege. The Koran only authorizes the acquisition of slaves taken in actual
warfare against idolaters, and none were purchased by Moslems until the
accession of the Ommeyades. Mohammed denounced traffic in slaves as abominable,
and referred to those who engaged in it as outcasts deserving of reprobation
and contempt.
A slave can act as a trustee, and while he is incapacitated from making a will
to become operative while he remains in servitude, if it is to take effect
after he becomes free, he can dispose of his estate in this way. A testator can
appoint his own slave his executor, if his children are minors, but not if they
are of age. He can also, with the consent of his master, appoint the slave of
another to administer his estate. (Syed Ameer Ali, Mohammedan Law, Vol. I,
Chap. XII, Pages 357, 461, 648, 579. Vol. II, Introduction, Page 27.) He
sedulously inculcated the practice of benevolence to all those in bondage. "A
man who behaves ill to his slave will not enter into Paradise. Show kindness to
your parent and to kindred, and to that which your right hands possess."
(Koran, Sura, IV, 40.)
The emancipation of a slave is one of the most meritorious acts of piety which
a Moslem can perform, and confers upon him signal blessings in the world to
come. While the Romans often permitted their aged and inferior slaves to die of
starvation, it is accounted a disgrace and a cause of reproach for a Mohammedan
to neglect any who are ill or too old to work, or even to alienate those who
have been for a long time in his service. (Hughes, Dictionary of Islam, Article
"Slaves.")
The general condition of the slave in the United States in former times is
indicated by the following definitions: "Slaves shall be deemed, sold, taken,
reputed and adjudged in law to be chattels personal, in the hands of their
owners and possessors, and their executors, administrators and assigns, to all
intents, constructions, and purposes whatsoever." (2 Brevard's Digest, 229.)
"Our slaves can do nothing in their own right; can hold no property, can
neither buy, sell, barter, or dispose of anything, without express permission
from the master or overseer; so that everything that they can possess or do is,
in legal contemplation, on the authority of the master." (Wheeler, Law of
Slavery, 1, 6.)
The Louisiana Code declared that: "The slave is entirely subject to the will of
his master who may correct and chastise him, though not with unusual rigor, not
so as to maim or mutilate him, or expose him to the danger of loss of life, or
to cause him death." According to the same body of laws, a slave was legally
incapable of holding public office or exercising any private trust; he could
make no contract except one relative to his own emancipation; he was not
permitted to bring or defend a civil action, except when his freedom was
involved; his marriage
(23) Where anyone does not open a will in the ordinary way, but cuts the cord
with which it is tied, he will be excused, because he is not guilty of bad
faith who does not open the will itself.
(24) Where, not the entire will, but only a portion of the same, is opened, it
must be said that the person who opens it comes within the terms of the Edict,
for it makes but little difference whether the entire will, or only a part of
it, is opened.
was not productive of the ordinary civil results of such an union; his children
belonged to his owner; and the latter was pecuniarily responsible for any
offense committed by him. A slave could not be emancipated under the age of
thirty years, and not then, if his conduct for the four preceding years had not
been exemplary; unless he had saved the life of his master or of some member of
his immediate family, in which case his age was not taken into consideration.
While emancipation was not encouraged, it was irrevocable, and the former owner
was under an implied obligation to afterwards provide for the slave, if he
should prove incapable of maintaining himself. In conformity with the Roman
law, if the cruelty of the master was established, it was in the discretion of
the court to order the victim of it to be sold at public auction, in order to
remove him from the tyrannical control of him who had been guilty of such an
unjustifiable abuse of authority.
Although slaves were stated to be intrinsically chattels, still, under some
circumstances they were classed as real estate. The reason for this is not
apparent, as they were not always, like certain mediaeval serfs, such as
villains regardant, attached to the glebe, and hence incapable of separate
alienation. "Slaves were declared by law to be real estate, and descended to
the heir-at-law. They are considered real estate in the case of descents."
(Wheeler, The Law of Slavery, I, 2.) By a statute of North Carolina, enacted to
prevent fraud, a gift of slaves was declared to be of no force or effect unless
made in writing, signed, attested, acknowledged like a conveyance of land, and
registered within a year. (Ibid. VI, 47.) "An assignment of slaves not under
seal is void, when there is no delivery of possession, or price paid." (Ibid.
VI, 67.) It required but a short time to acquire prescriptive ownership in a
slave. "Five years uninterrupted adverse possession of a slave not only bars
the remedy of the real owner, but vests an absolute legal right in the
possessor." (Ibid. VI, 78.) The rule of warranty adopted in the sale of cattle
and other animals was applicable to the transfer of slaves. There was no
distinction. "Warranty is in the nature of the contract of sale. That is, the
law implies it, if a contrary agreement be not made. But it is not essential to
such a contract." (Strawbridge and Warfield, 4 Louisiana Rep. 20.) "An express
warranty extends to every kind of soundness known and unknown to the seller."
(Wheeler, The Law of Slavery, VI, 107 Arts.) It did not, however, guard against
visible defects, when the rule caveat emptor applied. (Ibid. VII, 123.)
All of the Southern States had laws subjecting slaves to dower, like any other
property, and protecting the right of the widow; which was provided for even
when the slaves were emancipated by the testator and she declined to take under
the will, but demanded her legal interest in the estate. In such a case the
emancipation was void. In certain commonwealths, testamentary emancipation was
prohibited. "By the laws of Tennessee, slaves cannot be set free by last will
and testament." (Ibid. IV, 35.)
The incompetency of slaves as witnesses was subject to many variations
dependent upon statute. In the courts of South Carolina, a negro, no matter
what his condition, was not permitted to give testimony against anyone; in
those of Virginia, he could testify in criminal cases against persons of his
own color bound or free, but in civil suits only where free negroes were
parties. Under no circumstances was a slave admitted to testify against a white
person anywhere. Not being legally entitled to protection by the State, he was
not competent to prosecute an act of violence directed against his person, but
his master was entitled to the remedy of an action of trespass on this ground.
"The criminal offence of assault and
(25) Where anyone opens a codicil, but does not open the will, he becomes
liable under the Edict, because the codicil forms a part of the will.
(26) There is ground for the enforcement of the Edict whether the will that is
opened is valid, or not.
(27) The same rule applies to those matters which relate to the substitution,
where a male or a female minor is alleged to have been killed.
(28) When one person opens a will, and another reads it publicly, and a third
copies it, all of those who did these things separately will be liable under
the Edict.
battery cannot at Common Law be committed on the person of a slave." The same
principle applied to homicide, "The proper rule of damages for killing a slave,
is the value of the slave to his master at the time of his death". (Ibid. XVII
202 243.)
The prejudice in favor of liberty, so persistently inculcated by the laws of
Justinian, found no counterpart in the legislation of the Southern States of
the Union. Emancipation was discouraged to such an extent that in some
commonwealths, if the prescribed legal formalities were not strictly complied
with, the slave alleged to have been liberated was declared to have no owner,
and to become the property of the first occupant who seized him. In Virginia
and North Carolina, a slave who remained in the State more than a year after he
was at his own disposal, forfeited his right of freedom, and could be disposed
of at public auction. Under the Laws of Mississippi, a negro who was unable to
prove that he was free was presumed to be a slave, and was liable to be sold by
order of court. The intermarriage of free negroes with white persons, in
Maryland, entailed the life-long servitude of the former. While statutory
provisions defining the hours of labor, and the amount of clothing and
sustenance to be furnished, existed, these matters were largely left to the
discretion of the owner, who presumably would not be negligent of the
preservation of valuable property.
Instruction of slaves was everywhere visited with severe penalties of fine and
imprisonment, and meetings for that purpose were declared by law to be unlawful
assemblies, productive of sedition. If a slave, unless by his master's order,
presumed to strike a white person, his punishment was left to the discretion of
the judge, provided it did not involve the loss of life or limb; a second
offence was capital. As a matter of public policy, for the protection of the
community, penalties for crime were vastly more severe in the case of slaves.
In many States they had a right to be tried by a jury, in others, a prescribed
number of lashes might be inflicted by order of a justice of the peace, and the
constitutional guarantee was only enjoyed by freemen. (Stroud, Laws Relating to
Slavery, II, III, IV.)
While no free white citizen was at liberty to conclude a business transaction
with a slave, and even his master could not authorize that wages should be paid
him: "It was not an offence either at common law or by statute to gamble with
slaves". (Wheeler, The Law of Slavery XXIII, 441.) It is difficult to
understand why this was tolerated, as indulgence in such a vice must have
seriously impaired the usefulness of the slave, and consequently have
diminished his value.
The marriage of slaves in the South corresponded to a certain extent with the
contubernium of the Romans, which was also merely an union for propagation,
without being invested with either religious sanction, or civil rights, or
responsibilities.
While nominally regulated by law, the greatest latitude was in fact allowed the
master in the infliction of punishment. His despotic authority was, for the
most part, unquestioned. If he did not himself wish to use the whip, and had no
overseer, he could send the recalcitrant slave to a public officer appointed
for that purpose, and direct the latter to give him a specified number of
lashes, which request was immediately complied with. (Goodell, The American
Slave Code, XIII,
(29) This Edict has reference not only to testamentary estates but also to
intestate successions, in order to prevent anyone from entering upon the
estate, or demanding praetorian possession of property belonging to the same,
before torture has been inflicted upon the slaves, lest an heir might conceal
the crime of his slaves for his own advantage.
(30) Scaevola very properly says that anyone will transmit to his heir the right
to bring praetorian actions if he should happen to die before entering upon the
estate, and it should be ascertained that he did not do so because he feared to
become liable under the Decree of the Senate and the Edict.
(31) If I should order a condition to be complied with between a certain day
and the time of my death, and the heirs do not comply with it through
ignorance, and, for the reason that such ignorance existed, the will could not
be opened without incurring the penalty of the Decree of the Senate; relief
should be granted to the heirs to enable them to fulfill the condition.
(32) Where any other impediment than fear of violating the Decree of the Senate
exists to prevent entrance upon the estate or opening of the will, that arising
from the Decree of the Senate, if there is any other, will be of no advantage
to the heir; as, for instance, if the wife of the murdered man was pregnant, or
was even supposed to be in that condition, and for this reason the appointed
heir could not enter upon the estate.
167.) The master was also authorized by an act of Congress and a decision of
the Supreme Court to arrest and detain his fugitive slave without a warrant.
This autocratic and irresponsible power was conferred upon the principle that,
"This dominion is essential to the value of slaves as property, to the security
of the master and the public tranquillity, greatly dependent upon their
subordination; and in fine, as most effectually securing the general protection
and comfort of the slaves themselves". (Wheeler, Law of Slavery, XVI, 244,
248.)
The surrender of a slave for noxia, as an equivalent for damage committed by
him, which released the master from further liability, borrowed directly from
the Civil Law, was recognized in Louisiana. (Civil Code of Louisiana, Art.
181.)
In some States a special act of the legislature was required for the
emancipation of a slave; in others an order of court had to be obtained upon a
proper showing; in most of them the liberation of slaves in fraud of creditors
was void.
A master could be compelled to enfranchise a slave in Louisiana, where the
latter had rendered important services to the State. In a case of this kind the
appraised value of the slave was paid out of the Public Treasury. (Civil Code
of Louisiana, Art. 191.)
By a statute of the same State, anyone attempting to promote discontent or
insubordination among slaves was liable to the penalty of death. (Statutes of
Louisiana [1852] p. 208.)
Notwithstanding the grievous abuses to which slavery was subject, and leaving
all sentimentality out of consideration, when the corruption, the
shiftlessness, the abject poverty, the almost universal dishonesty, the general
viciousness of the negroes of the United States --- many of whom have enjoyed
every advantage of education, lucrative employment, and refined associations
for more than half a century, without being able, or caring to profit by them ---
as well as the resultant national disadvantages of these conditions are brought
to mind; it has been seriously questioned whether servitude was not the lesser
of two evils, so far as both races were concerned, when the above-mentioned
apparently ineradicable savage instincts of the negro, and his notorious
incapacity for political, social, and economic improvement are taken into
account. --- ED.

4. Papinianus, Opinions, Book VI.
A man appointed his posthumous children his heirs, and, in case none should be
born, substituted his wife, and he was said to have been killed by his slaves,
and his wife died; the woman's heirs petitioned that the estate should be given
to them by virtue of the substitution. I gave it as my opinion that they should
only be heard if the wife was proved not to have been pregnant, and declined to
enter upon the estate on account of the Decree of the Senate. If, however, she
should die while pregnant, no complaint could be made that any injury had been
done to them.

5. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book L.
I think that necessary heirs are included in the Edict, if they interfere in
the business of the estate.
(1) The Praetor does not permit the possession of the estate to be demanded
under these circumstances; and I think that the Edict applies to all praetorian
possession.
(2) Property belonging to an estate shall not be confiscated, unless it is
established that the head of the household was killed, and that the heir
entered upon the estate before the slaves were put to the question, and
punished.
(3) Where anyone dies through neglect, or through the treachery of a physician,
his estate can be entered upon; but the duty of avenging his death devolves
upon the heir.

6. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XLVI.
Even if the murderer should be well known, torture must still be inflicted, in
order that the instigator of the crime may be detected. Moreover, the murderer
himself shall, by all means, be put to the question, and the other slaves also
punished.
(1) Although slaves shall not be tortured except where their master is accused
of a capital crime; still, torture can be properly inflicted even if the heir
is accused, whether he be a foreign, or the proper heir.
(2) Where one of two masters does not appear, the slaves held in common shall
be put to the question to ascertain what has happened to him; for they are
tortured to ascertain something with reference to the fate of the master who
does not appear, rather than to avenge his death, or to obtain information
which may implicate the master who is present in a capital crime.
(3) Where a master has been attacked, but not killed, nothing is provided by
the Decree of the Senate, for he himself can punish his own slave.
7. The Same, On the Silanian Decree of the Senate.
And in this instance, he will enjoy an extraordinary privilege with reference
to his freedman.1

%%%%%%%%%%%%%
footnote1 ---  That is to say, he can, by way of penalty for such a gross violation of duty
and exhibition of ingratitude, again reduce him to slavery. The obligation to
protect his former master, now his patron, did not cease with manumission. ---
ED.
%%%%%%%%%%%%%

8. The Same, On the Edict, Book XLIX.
It is provided by the Pisonian Decree of the Senate that: "Where a slave is
liable to some penalty and is about to be punished, the vendor shall refund the
price paid for him to the purchaser;" which was enacted by the Senate to avoid
any injury being done to the purchaser.
(1) Where a son under paternal control, who has made a testamentary disposition
of his castrense peculium, is killed, it should undoubtedly be maintained that
under these circumstances the estate of the deceased will belong to the
Treasury, if his heirs have entered upon his estate, and did not avenge his
death; just as in a similar instance, the estate of the head of a household
will also be forfeited.

9. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XVII.
When the property of a deceased person is confiscated by the Treasury because
his death was unavenged, an action is granted against it in favor of the
legatees, and all grants of freedom to slaves shall be perfected; that is to
say, of such as are excepted from the provisions of the Decree of the Senate.

10. Paulus, On the Silanian Decree of the Senate.
Where a disinherited son is killed before the estate of his father has been
entered upon, consideration must be paid to what takes place, so that, if the
estate is accepted, the slaves will not be held to belong to another; but if
the will should become void, measures must be taken just as if the son had been
their master, because they would have belonged to him if he had lived.
(1) It was established by a Constitution of the Divine Trajanus that freedmen
whom the deceased had manumitted could be put to the question.

11. Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book II.
The same rule will apply to those who have obtained the right to wear rings.

12. Paulus, On the Silanian Decree of the Senate.
Where a slave has been bequeathed by a testator who was murdered, and the
Praetor decides that he was entitled to his freedom by way of reward, it must be
said that his freedom cannot be prevented.

13. Venuleius, Saturninus, On Public Prosecutions, Book II. During the
Consulate of Taurus and Lepidus, the term of five years
was established by a Decree of the Senate for the institution of criminal
proceedings, where the will of a man who was said to have been killed by his
slaves had been opened contrary to the Decree of the Senate, which provision,
however, only applies to strangers; for, by the same Decree of the Senate,
those who are liable to punishment for parricide can always be accused without
reference to lapse of time.

14. Marcianus, On Public Prosecutions, Book XL
Slaves who have not reached the age of puberty are excepted from the operation
of the Silanian Decree of the Senate. The deputy, Trebius Germanus, however,
ordered punishment to be inflicted upon a slave under the age of puberty; and
this was not without reason, because the boy was very little under that age,
and was sleeping at the feet of his master at the time when he was killed, and
did not afterwards disclose that he had been murdered. As it was proved that he
was unable to have assisted him, it was also certain that he afterwards kept
silent; and it was held that boys under the age of puberty could only be
excused from liability under the Decree of the Senate, where they had merely
been under the same roof with their master, but where such slaves had been the
principals or accomplices in the crime, and were of such an age as to
understand what they were doing (even though they may not have reached the age
of puberty), they should not be excused from responsibility for the murder of
their master any more than for anything else.

15. Marcianus, On Informers.
Where substitutes avenge the death of the testator, shall the estate be
transferred to them? Papinianus says that it should not, for the penalty of the
first degree ought not to be the reward of the second.
(1) Where a legacy was bequeathed to an heir appointed to a portion of the
estate, and he failed to avenge the death of the deceased, the Divine Severus
and Antoninus stated in a Rescript that he should be deprived of the share of
the estate which had been bequeathed to him.
(2) Estates bequeathed by will, as well as those derived from intestate
succession, must be taken away from heirs who have been derelict in avenging
the death of the deceased (even if they appear as patrons), although they may
be entitled to the succession as direct heirs.

16. Marcellus, Digest, Book XII.
Where a master was killed by one of his slaves, and a slave who was owned in
common by the deceased and another party detected the criminal, he should be
liberated on account of the favor due to freedom, but the partner should be
paid his share of the value of the slave.

17. Modestinus, Rules, Book VIII.
The slaves should first be put to the torture, and if they confess should then
be interrogated, in order that it may be ascertained at whose instigation they
committed the crime.

18. The Same, Rules, Book IX.
It is not forbidden to complain of an inofficious testament, and to avenge the
death of the defunct at the same time. Paulus rendered this opinion.

19. The Same, Pandects, Book VIII.
When a master is attacked, his slaves should attempt to assist him with arms,
and with their hands, with cries, and with the interposition of their bodies.
If anyone should not offer assistance when he is able to do so, he shall
deservedly be subjected to punishment for this reason.

20. Papinianus, Opinions, Book II.
An heir, who is instituting a prosecution for poisoning, is not forbidden to
transact urgent business relating to the estate, if he preserves all evidence
and proofs of the crime.

21. The Same, Opinions, Book VI.
The time for demanding the possession of the property of an estate shall not be
delayed on account of any question arising out of the poisoning; and the claim
may properly be made while the proof of the crime is still in abeyance. The
Senate determined otherwise where a master was said to have been killed by his
slaves, because as it was necessary that the freedom of said slaves should not
be granted them at once, in order that they might be put to the torture.
A granddaughter, who had demanded possession of the estate of her grandmother,
being aware that she had been killed, did not avenge her death. It was held
that a trust which the grandmother owed to her granddaughter, by virtue of the
will of another, should not be deducted from the estate of the grandmother,
when it was confiscated by the Treasury, for the bad faith of the heir must be
punished.
(1) If, however, the woman had lost the benefit of the bequest through mere
negligence, it is just that the trust should be deducted, the right of the
obligation remaining unimpaired.
(2) Where persons guilty of murder have been discharged through the injustice
of the Governor, it is held that the heirs should not be deprived of the estate
if they have properly discharged their duty, even though they may not have
appealed from the decision.

22. Paulus, Opinions, Book XVI.
Gaius Seius, while in a feeble condition, complained that he had been poisoned
by his slaves, and then died. His sister, Lucia Titia, became his heir, and
after his death neglected to prosecute his murderer. She herself died ten years
afterwards, and someone gave notice that the estate of Gaius Titius was liable
to forfeiture. I ask whether the criminal prosecution was extinguished by the
death of Titia. Paulus answered that, in the case stated, it did not appear to
be extinguished by the death of the ungrateful heir, as a pecuniary penalty was
involved.

23. Marcianus, Concerning Trusts, Book XIII.
If a will should be opened before it was known that the testator had been
killed, and then the crime should be ascertained to have been committed, I
think that, where proper cause is shown, the appointed heir should be compelled
to enter upon the estate which he declared was insolvent, and make restitution
in accordance with the Trebellian Decree of the Senate.

24. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book L.
Where anyone is compelled to enter upon an estate which he has reason to
suspect of being insolvent, he will not be liable under the Edict.

25. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XVII.
It is provided by the Cornelian Law with reference to the reward to which an
accuser is entitled who seeks out and gives information of the whereabouts of
slaves who have fled before torture was applied, that he shall receive five
aurei out of the estate of the deceased for each slave that he convicts, or if
this sum can not be obtained from that source, it shall be paid out of the
Public Treasury. This reward shall not be given for the apprehension and
conviction of every slave who was under the same roof and in the same place
with the deceased, but only for those who are found guilty of the murder.
(1) It is also provided with reference to those slaves who fled before torture
was applied, that if, after the will has been opened, it should be found that
they were granted their freedom thereby, judgment shall be rendered in
accordance with the law relating to assassins: so that they cannot defend
themselves after having been imprisoned, and that if they are convicted, they
shall be punished just like slaves, and ten aurei shall be taken out of the
estate, by way of reward, and given to the party who convicted them.
(2) Proceedings are instituted under this Edict against a person who, contrary
to the provisions of the Edict of the Praetor, is said to have opened the will,
or to have committed some other act, in violation of them; for (as in evident
from what has been previously stated) there are many things on account of which
the penalty prescribed by the Edict can be imposed.
It is clear that this action is a popular one, and its penalty is a hundred
aurei to be taken from the property of the person who is convicted; and the
Praetor promises that half of said sum shall be given by way of reward to him by
whose efforts the criminal was found guilty, and the other half shall be turned
into the Public Treasury.

26. Scaevola, Digest, Book XXXIV.
Gaius Seius owed Titius property under a trust established by the will of his
cousin, and Titius received it from the heirs of Seius. The question arose, as
the heirs of Gaius Seius did not avenge his death, whether Titius could,
nevertheless, accuse these heirs as being unworthy to obtain the estate,
because they had not avenged his death; and whether the fact that he had
received from them the trust to which he was entitled under the will of his
cousin, the deceased, would not stand in his way. The answer was that, in
accordance with the facts stated, there was no reason that it should be
considered an obstacle.

27. Callistratus, On the Rights of the Treasury, Book I.
Where there are several heirs, and the will is opened against the consent of
some of them, or without their knowledge, those who are free from blame will
not lose their shares of the estate.
===============================================================================




THE CIVIL LAW
INCLUDING
The Twelve Tables, The Institutes of Gaius, The Rules of
Ulpian, The Opinions of Paulus, The Enactments
of Justinian, and The Constitutions of Leo:
Translated from the original Latin, edited, and compared with all accessible
systems of jurisprudence ancient and modern.
By S. P. SCOTT, A. M.
Author of "History of the Moorish
Empire in Europe," Translator of
the "Visigothic Code"
IN SEVENTEEN VOLUMES VOL. VII.
CINCINNATI THE CENTRAL TRUST COMPANY
Executor of the Estate Samuel P. Scott, Deceased
PUBLISHERS
CONTENTS OF VOLUME VII.
THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS.
(Continued.)
BOOK XXIX.
(Continued.)
TITLE VI.
PAGE
WHERE ANYONE PREVENTS ANOTHER FROM MAKING A WILL, OR COMPELS HIM TO MAKE ONE
.......................................... 3
TITLE VII. CONCERNING THE LAW OF CODICILS ................................. 4
BOOK XXX.
TITLE I. CONCERNING LEGACIES AND TRUSTS ................................ 10.
BOOK XXXI.
TITLE I. CONCERNING LEGACIES AND TRUSTS ................................ 62
BOOK XXXII.
TITLE I. CONCERNING LEGACIES AND TRUSTS ................................ 106
BOOK XXXIII.
TITLE I. CONCERNING ANNUAL LEGACIES AND TRUSTS ........................ 157
TITLE II. PAGE
CONCERNING USE, USUFRUCT, INCOME, LODGING, AND SERVICES LEFT BY LEGACIES OR
TRUSTS .......................................... 167
TITLE III. CONCERNING THE LEGACY OF SERVITUDES ............................ 178
TITLE IV. CONCERNING THE PREFERRED LEGACY OF A DOWRY .................... 180
TITLE V.
CONCERNING THE OPTION OR CHOICE OF ARTICLES BEQUEATHED AS A LEGACY
..................................................... 187
TITLE VI. CONCERNING BEQUESTS OF WHEAT, WINE, AND OIL ................... 192
TITLE VII. CONCERNING LEGACIES OF EQUIPMENT OR IMPLEMENTS ............... 195
TITLE VIII. CONCERNING LEGACIES OF PECULIUM ............................... 213
TITLE IX. CONCERNING LEGACIES OF PROVISIONS .............................. 220
TITLE X. CONCERNING BEQUESTS OF HOUSEHOLD GOODS ........................ 224
BOOK XXXIV.
TITLE I. CONCERNING LEGACIES OF SUBSISTENCE OR FOOD ..................... 228
TITLE II.
CONCERNING LEGACIES OF GOLD, SILVER, ORNAMENTS, JEWELS, PERFUMES, CLOTHING,
TAPESTRY, AND STATUES ............................ 239
TITLE III. CONCERNING THE BEQUEST OF A RELEASE FROM LIABILITY ............. 255
TITLE IV. CONCERNING THE CANCELLATION OR TRANSFER OF LEGACIES AND TRUSTS. 269
TITLE V. CONCERNING DOUBTFUL MATTERS .................................. 279
TITLE VI. PAGE CONCERNING BEQUESTS MADE BY WAY OF PENALTY ..................
288
TITLE VII. CONCERNING THE RULE OF CATO ................................... 289
TITLE VIII.
CONSIDERING TESTAMENTARY PROVISIONS WHICH ARE CONSIDERED AS NOT HAVING BEEN
WRITTEN ....................................... 290
TITLE IX.
CONCERNING THOSE WHO ARE DEPRIVED OF THEIR LEGACIES AS BEING UNWORTHY OF THEM
......................................... 291
BOOK XXXV.
TITLE I.
CONCERNING TESTAMENTARY CONDITIONS AND DESIGNATIONS, THEIR REASONS AND THEIR
MODIFICATIONS ............................... 299
THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS.
(Continued.)





BOOK XXIX.
(Continued.)

TITLE VI.
WHERE ANYONE PREVENTS ANOTHER PROM MAKING A WILL, OR COMPELS HIM TO MAKE ONE.
1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XLVIII.
The Divine Hadrian decreed that if anyone, while endeavoring to obtain
possession of an estate to which he was entitled either by descent or by will,
should prevent a person from entering, who had been sent for, either to draw up
a will which the testator desired to execute, or to change one already made, he
shall be denied the right to bring any action, and when this is done, the
Treasury will be entitled to the estate.
(1) Where a master acting in bad faith prevents a will from being changed by
which his slave had been appointed heir, even though, having been manumitted,
the latter should enter upon the estate, he shall be denied all rights of
action, and his children, if anything has been left to them, shall also lose
their rights, even though they are not under his control. Where, however, a
legacy has been left to the master in trust, and he is requested to pay it, it
must be said that he can receive the legacy, since he himself is not entitled
to it, but it must be transferred to another.
(2) Where several heirs have been appointed, and all of them are guilty of bad
faith in preventing a will from being changed, it must be said that rights of
action shall be refused all of them, because all have acted fraudulently.

2. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XLIV.
Where anyone acts in bad faith in order to prevent the appearance of witnesses
to a will, and by this means the power of making the will is lost, all rights
of action shall be refused to the party responsible for the fraud, whether he
is the heir-at-law, or was appointed under a former will.
(1) The act of a brother, however, under these circumstances, does not injure
his brother.
(2) Where he who committed the fraudulent act was charged with the transfer of
the estate, it will be forfeited with all liabilities, so that the Treasury
will obtain the benefit of the Falcidian Law, and the beneficiary of the trust
will receive three-fourths of the estate.

3. Papinianus, Opinions, Book XV.
Where a husband does not, by employing either force or fraud, interfere to
prevent his wife from changing, by means of a codicil, a will which she had
made in his favor but (as often happens), merely attempts to appease the anger
of his wife by marital remonstrances; I gave as my opinion that he was not
guilty of any offence, and should not be deprived of what had been given him by
the will.


TITLE VII. CONCERNING THE LAW OP CODICILS.

1. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book IV.

It has very frequently been set forth in Rescripts and Imperial
Constitutions, that where a testator was under the impression that he
had made a will (but which was void as such), and did not intend it to
be valid as a codicil, he is held not to have executed a
codicil. Therefore, whatever is included in a will of this kind will
not be due, although it would have been if included in a codicil.1

2. Julianus, Digest, Book XXXVII.
Where a child is born after a will has been executed, and before a codicil is
written, and anything is left to it in trust by the codicil, it will be valid.

[[\footnote 1. The distinguishing characteristic of a codicil at Civil
Law, when compared with a will, was the fact that an heir was not, and
could not be appointed by it. The designation of an heir was deemed
essential to the validity of a testament, not only by the Romans, but
also by the ancient Common Law of England. "Testament sauns executour
est come nul." (Plowden, Les Commentaries ou Reports,Page 185.)

The origin of codicils is generally referred to the reign of Augustus,
during which Lentulus, Proconsul of Africa, having executed a will in
favor of the Emperor and his daughter, subsequently made a codicil in
which he charged them with the execution of certain trusts. Some
jurists, however, hold that they preceded the Law of the Twelve
Tables.

Many of the formalities essential to the legality of a testament were
not exacted in a codicil, although it was usually considered a
supplementary will.  The attestation of five witnesses was about the
only one imperatively demanded to insure its validity, and even this
requirement was not, at certain periods of Roman history, deemed
indispensable. Any act could be performed under a codicil which did
not require the agency of an appointed heir, and which the heir-at-law
could execute. A codicil might or might not be confirmed by a will,
and if confirmed, the obligation to pay the bequests was just as
binding as if they had been the subject of original testamentary
disposition. A codicil might also be noncupative, although this is in
direct contradiction of the primary meaning of the term, which
suggests an instrument in writing. An estate could be left in trust
under a codicil which was not confirmed by a will; such confirmation
was, however, necessary to insure the payment of a legacy. A will
which, through some defect, was invalid, was often good as a codicil.
Under our laws, a codicil is held to be an integral part of a will,
and it must be executed and attested just like one, and written on the
same piece of paper, or attached thereto. It is not, however,
necessary that this should be the case in order to establish its
testamentary validity, when it is intended as a republication of the
will. --- ED.]]

(1) If, however, he to whom anything was given should die after the execution
of the will, and before the codicil in which the bequest is made is executed,
it will be considered as not having been written.
(2) A rule peculiar to a codicil is that whatever is included in it shall be
considered to have the same effect as if it had been included in the will.
Hence freedom is not legally granted to a slave who, at the time of the
execution of the will, was the property of the testator, but, when the codicil
was executed, belonged to another.
And, on the other hand, if the slave belonged to another at the time that the
will was made, and at the time of the execution of the codicil had become the
property of the testator, freedom is then understood to have been granted to a
slave belonging to another; and therefore, although it cannot be directly
bestowed, still recourse can be had to a trust.
(3) An insane person is not understood to have the power to make a codicil, for
the reason that he is not considered to be competent to perform any other act;
since, in the transaction of every kind of business, he is held to be in the
position of one who is absent, or who takes no part in the transaction.
(4) Where an estate is fruitlessly bequeathed by a will, it cannot be confirmed
by a codicil, but it can be claimed under a trust, with a reservation of the
amount granted by the Lex Falcidia.

3. The Same, Digest, Book XXXIX.
Where anyone who has not made a will establishes a trust, by means of a
codicil, as follows: "Whoever shall be my heir, or the praetorian possessor of
my estate, I leave to him as trustee," the sums left under the trust must be
paid, because the head of the household who had the power to make a will, and
made a codicil, is in the same position as if all those were his heirs into
whose hands the estate will come either through descent or through possession
under praetorian law.
(1) Where a child is born after the execution of a codicil, and it is the next
of kin, or the direct heir, it will not be obliged to pay any sums left in
trust, for it is also understood to be the appointed heir, and therefore it
should not be considered as having broken the codicil.
(2) Where a will has been made, even if a codicil should not be confirmed by
it, the codicil will, nevertheless, obtain all its force and effect from the
will. Again, if the estate is not entered upon by virtue of the will, a trust
created by a codicil of this kind will be of no validity whatever.

4. The Same, Digest, Book LXIII.
It has been decided that a testator who was solvent at the time of making a
codicil can legally grant freedom to his slaves, although he may not have been
solvent at the time when the will was executed.

5. Papinianus, Opinions, Book VII.
A codicil which precedes a will is not valid unless confirmed by the will or by
a second codicil subsequently executed, or where its pro-
visions are established by some other expression of the intention of the
testator; but any different dispositions that the deceased may subsequently
make shall not stand.

6. Marcianus, Institutes, Book VII.
The Divine Severus and Antoninus stated in a Rescript, where a mother appointed
her children her heirs absolutely, but, in a codicil, added a condition of
emancipation, that her act was void; because she could not impose a condition
upon an heir who had been appointed, or directly make a substitution under a
codicil.
(1) Anyone can make several codicils, and it is not necessary for him to write
or seal them with his own hand.
(2) Although, in the confirmation of a codicil, the head of a household may
have added that it was not his intention that it should be valid, unless it was
sealed and signed with his own hand; still, the codicil made by him will be
valid, even if it had neither been signed nor sealed with his own hand, for
subsequent dispositions annul those which precede them.
(3) He only can make a codicil who is competent to make a will.
(4) If anyone, by a codicil, should bequeath a legacy to a person who died
after he had made his will, the bequest will be considered as not having been
made, even though the codicil may have been confirmed by the will.

7. The Same, Rules, Book II.
There are certain dispositions which do not relate to the confirmation of
codicils; as, for instance, where anyone confirms a codicil before being taken
prisoner, and writes a codicil while in captivity, for such a codicil will not
be valid.
The same rule applies where a person in some way or other ceases to possess
testamentary capacity.
(1) Moreover, in questions which are rather those of fact than of law, what is
included in a codicil is not to be considered as if it had been written at the
time when the codicil was confirmed; for example, if it should be stated in the
codicil, "That such-and-such a garment which belongs to me is bequeathed", the
time that the codicil was written, and not that when it was confirmed, should
be considered. Again, if a bequest is made to Seius by a codicil as follows,
"If Titius is living", or "If he is so many years old", the date of the
codicil, and not that of the will, should be considered.

8. Paulus, On the Law of Codicils.
Codicils are drawn up in four ways: for they are either to be confirmed in the
future; or have been confirmed in the past; or they are made by means of a
trust, where a will has been executed; or where there is no will.
(1) Those who succeed to an estate ab intestatocan be charged with a trust, as
it is considered that the deceased has voluntarily left them the estate to
which they were entitled by law.
(2) A codicil is valid whenever the party who executed it was competent to make
a will. But it must not be understood that we require him to have been
competent to make a will at the time when he wrote the codicil. (For what if he
was unable to obtain a sufficient number of witnesses?) It is indispensable,
however, for him to have had the legal right to make a will.
(3) If anyone, by his will, should confirm a codicil to be made hereafter, and
then offer himself to be arrogated, and afterwards make a will, and die
emancipated; the question arises whether the legacies bequeathed by the codicil
should be paid, as the will is valid ? He, however, executed the codicil at a
time when he did not have testamentary capacity; and this case is not similar
to that of a dumb person, who can legally confirm a codicil; for, although he
is not competent to make a will, still one which he made before he became dumb
remains in the same condition; but the will of this party is void, and, he is
in a certain way disposing of the property of others by means of it.
We hold, however, that the codicil is valid, for even if the birth of a
posthumous child should break the will, and it should afterwards die, the
codicil will still be valid.
(4) Where a soldier executes a will before entering the army, and executes a
codicil after his enlistment, the question arises whether the codicil will be
valid under military law, since a will made under such circumstances is valid
by the Common Law only where the soldier did not seal it, or make some addition
to it during the term of his military service. It is certain that the codicil
made during military service should not be referred back to the will in order
to establish its validity, but is valid by military law.
(5) Where freedom is granted by a codicil to a slave who had also received a
legacy by will, we say that the legacy is valid, just as if it had been so from
the beginning.
(6) Where anyone confirms a codicil of a certain kind, for instance, "the one
which I shall execute last", the provisions contained in any codicil will not
be considered to be valid immediately, so long as others can be made; and
therefore if others should be made subsequently, all grants of legacies by
former ones will be void.

9. Marcellus, Digest, Book IX.
Aristo denies that a codicil is valid where it is made by a person who was
ignorant as to whether or not he was the head of the family. Ulpianus states in
a note, "Unless he had served in the army, for then his will will be valid".

10. Papinianus, Questions, Book XV.
The opinion that an estate cannot be bequeathed by a codicil has been handed
down from former times, and the reason for this is to prevent the will, which
obtains all its force from the appointment of the heirs, from appearing to be
confirmed by means of a codicil, which itself is dependent upon the will for
its validity.

11. The Same, Questions, Book XIX.
Acertain man who was not aware that his wife was pregnant, in a codicil
directed to his son, liberated some of his slaves. After the death of the
father, a daughter was born to him, and as it was established that her father
had not had her in his mind at any time, it was held that the grant of freedom
should be made by the son alone:
12. The Same, Questions, Book XXII.
After the sister had been reimbursed for her share of the slaves.

13. The Same, Questions, Book XIX.
For it can undoubtedly be maintained that the daughter could not be compelled
to manumit the slaves, since her father requested nothing of her, and she
becomes an heir in her own right.
(1) The point is often discussed as to what conclusion should be reached, where
a man did not make a will, but stated in a codicil: "I wish Titius to be my
heir". It makes a great deal of difference whether he left the estate in trust
in charge of his lawful heir, by means of this instrument, which he intended
for a codicil, or whether he thought that he was making a will, for, in this
case, Titius could claim nothing from the lawful heir.
The intention of the party in question is generally ascertained by the
examination of the instrument itself. For if he left a legacy to be discharged
by Titius, and appointed a substitute for him, if he should not be the heir,
there is no doubt that he should be understood to have intended to make a will,
and not a codicil.

14. Scaevola, Questions, Book VIII.
Certain authorities hold (as I recollect) that in Vivianus a controversy is
explained which arose between Sabinus, Cassius, and Proculus with reference to
the question whether legacies given, or taken away by a codicil from persons
who died after they were appointed heirs, were due to the substitutes; that is
to say, whether the giving or the taking away of the legacies was as valid
where they were provided for by a codicil, as they were when provided for by a
will. It is said that Sabinus and Cassius answered that this was the case, and
that Proculus dissented. The conclusion of Sabinus and Cassius, (as they
themselves assert) is that the codicil is considered as part of the will, and
that it sustains the observance of the law with reference to the delivery of
the property. Still, I venture to say that the opinion of Proculus is the more
correct; for a legacy is of no force or effect which is bequeathed to one who,
at the time the codicil was made, was not in existence, even though he was
living at the time when the will was drawn up; as it should belong to him to
whom it is given.
Then the question should be asked whether the legacy was properly bequeathed,
so that the rule of law shall not be inquired into before the existence of the
person is ascertained. In the case stated, therefore, the bequest is of no
force or effect, if it was made or taken away by a codicil, after the death of
the heir; for the reason that the heir referred
to was not in existence, and the deprivation or the grant of the legacy becomes
void in consequence.
This would not apply where a substitute is given for an heir appointed to the
entire estate, as the codicil would be confirmed by the appointment.
(1) Where two heirs have been appointed, and substitutes assigned, and one of
them should die, the legacies will still be considered valid; but some
discussion arose with reference to the co-heir, and whether he owed the entire
legacy, where the bequest was as follows: "Whoever shall be my heir." Or must
it be held that all is not due, for the reason that the heir who was
substituted should pay a portion of the same, even though he himself does not
owe it?
The same discussion may arise with reference to specified obligations ; but I
think that there is much more ground for the co-heir being liable for the
entire legacy, because the party who was joined with him is no longer in
existence.

15. Africanus, Questions, Book II.
But as it was the will of the testator that the legacy should be paid out of
the entire estate, it must be said that an exception on the ground of bad faith
will lie for the benefit of the heirs appointed by the will, where a sum
greater than they are entitled to is claimed.

16. Paulus, Questions, Book XXI.
Where a codicil is made without a will having been drawn up, the successor of
the deceased, even though he was born after the codicil was executed, will owe
whatever legacies were bequeathed by the same; for the codicil is valid, no
matter who the heir may be who is entitled to the intestate succession; for
only one case was taken into consideration, and it does not make any difference
who obtains the estate, provided he succeeds ab intestato.The codicil depends
upon the will, if one was made, no matter at what time this was done. And (in
order that I may express myself more clearly) where the head of a household
dies intestate, the codicil requires no confirmation, but takes the place of a
will. Where, however, a will has been made, the codicil is governed by the same
law.

17. The Same, Sentences, Book HI.
Letters by which an estate is promised, or affection is expressed, have not the
force of a codicil.

18. Celsus, Digest, Book XX.
Plotiana to her friend, Celsus, Greeting. Lucius Titius made the following
provision in his will: "If I leave anything by will in any document, which in
any way relates to this will, I desire it to be valid." I ask whether a codicil
made before this will should be confirmed. Juventius Celsus to Plotiana,
Greeting. These words: "If I leave anything which relates to this will, I
desire it to be valid," also include everything which was bequeathed before the
will was made.

19. Marcellus, Digest, Book XIV.
A father, who had an only son, made a codicil directed to him, and died
intestate, leaving as his heir a son whom he had begotten after he had made the
codicil. No one can say that the codicil was annulled, and therefore if the
deceased did not expect to have a posthumous heir, the codicil will not become
void through his death; and the son to whom it was directed will be compelled
to pay the legacy in proportion to his share of the estate, but the posthumous
son will not be compelled to pay anything.
But if he, at the time of his death, should have left two surviving sons, but
thought that one of them was dead, in like manner, it can be held that the son
to whom the codicil was directed may be compelled to pay the entire legacy,
just as if he had been the sole heir of his father; but he will only owe a sum
in proportion to his share of the estate. Still, no part of a legacy which
cannot be divided shall be paid, as the father would not have deprived his son
of his share, unless he had thought that he would be his sole heir.

20. Paulus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book V.
Where an heir has been orally appointed, and the bequests of the legacies have
been reduced to writing; Julianus says that this instrument should not be
understood to be a will in which the heir is not mentioned, but it should
rather be considered a codicil, and I think this to be the more correct
opinion.



