
THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS. BOOK XLIV.

BOOK XLIV.
TITLE I. CONCERNING EXCEPTIONS, PRESCRIPTIONS, AND PRELIMINARY INQUIRIES .. 39
TITLE II. CONCERNING THE EXCEPTION BASED ON RES JUDICATA ................ 44
TITLE III.
CONCERNING DIFFERENT TEMPORARY EXCEPTIONS AND THE UNION OF SEVERAL POSSESSIONS
......................................... 54
TITLE IV. CONCERNING THE EXCEPTION FOUNDED ON FRAUD AND FEAR ........... 59
TITLE V. UNDER WHAT CIRCUMSTANCES AN ACTION SHALL NOT BE GRANTED .... 72
TITLE VI. CONCERNING PROPERTY IN LITIGATION .............................. 74
TITLE VII. CONCERNING OBLIGATIONS AND ACTIONS ............................. 75


TITLE I.
CONCERNING EXCEPTIONS, PRESCRIPTIONS, AND PRELIMINARY INQUIRIES.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book IV.
He is held to occupy the position of plaintiff who makes use of an exception,
for where a defendant has recourse to an exception he becomes a plaintiff.
2. The Same, On the Edict, Book LXXIV.
An exception is so called for the reason that it operates as an exclusion, and
is ordinarily opposed to proceedings to collect a claim, for the purpose of
barring the statement of the same as well as judgment in favor of the party who
brings the suit.
(1) Replications are nothing more than exceptions pleaded by the party
plaintiff, which are necessary in order to bar exceptions; for a replication is
always introduced for the purpose of opposing an exception.
(2) It must be remembered that every exception, or replication, is for the
purpose of preventing the opposite party from proceeding further. An exception
bars the plaintiff, and a replication bars the
defendant.
(3) It is customary for a triplication to be granted against the' replication,
and other pleas to follow in order and, after this, the
names are multiplied, whether the defendant or the plaintiff interposes an
objection.
(4) We usually say that some exceptions are dilatory, and others peremptory;
as, for instance, a dilatory exception is one which postpones the action, thus
one denying the authority of an agent is a dilatory exception. For he who
alleges that anyone has not the power to act as an attorney does not deny that
the action should be brought, but maintains that the person who brings it is
not qualified to do so.
3. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book I.
Exceptions are either perpetual and peremptory, or temporary and dilatory.
Those are perpetual and peremptory which will always lie, and cannot be
avoided; for example, those based on fraud and res judicata,and where anything
is alleged to have been done against the laws or decrees of the Senate; also
such as are applicable in the case of an informal agreement, that is to say,
such as provide that the money due shall, under no circumstances, be collected.
Exceptions are temporary and dilatory which cannot be brought at any time, and
can be avoided; and of this description is a temporary agreement between the
parties under which an action cannot be brought for a specified period, for
instance, within five years. Exceptions by which the action of an agent is
barred, and which can be avoided, are also dilatory.
4. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XX.
If the question is asked whether a ward can be barred by an exception on the
ground of fraud, where money which was due to him has been paid without the
authority of his guardian, and he demands payment a second time, it must be
ascertained whether, when he makes the demand, he still has the money, or has
purchased something with it.
5. The Same, On the Edict, Book XVIII.
A defendant who alleges that he has already sworn in court that he does not owe
the money for which he is sued, can avail himself of all other exceptions in
addition to that based on taking the oath, or of the rest of them without it;
for he is permitted to make use of several defences.
6. The Same, On the Edict, Book LXXI.
If a legatee brings an action to recover the property bequeathed, an exception
based on the fraud of the testator can be pleaded against him; for, just as an
heir who succeeds to the entire estate can be barred by an exception, so a
legatee can also be barred as the successor of an individual part of the same.
7. The Same, On Plautius, Book III.
Exceptions to which certain persons are entitled do not pass to others; as, for
instance, where a partner, a father, or a patron, can
plead an exception to have judgment rendered against him only for the amount
which he is able to pay; this privilege is not granted to a surety. Hence the
surety of a husband, who was given after the marriage has been dissolved, will
have judgment rendered against him for the entire amount of the dowry.
(1) Exceptions which have reference to property can, however, also be pleaded
by sureties; for example those based on res judicata,fraud, and where an oath
has been exacted, if this was done under duress. Therefore, if the principal
debtor entered into an agreement concerning the property, his surety will, by
all means, be entitled to an exception.
An exception based upon the appearance of a surety, on the ground that the
claim will prejudice the right of freedom, can also be employed by him. The
same must be said where anyone has become surety for a son under paternal
control in violation of the Decree of the Senate, or for a minor of twenty-five
years of age, who has been defrauded. If, however, he has been deceived with
reference to the property, he will not be entitled to relief before he obtains
restitution, and an exception should not be granted the surety.
8. The Same, On Plautius, Book XIV.
No one is forbidden to avail himself of several exceptions, even though they
may be different in their character.
9. Marcellus, Digest, Book HI.
An adversary is not considered to admit the claim of the other party, merely
because he has recourse to an exception.
10. Modestinus, Opinions, Book XII.
Modestinus gave it as his opinion that a judgment obtained by others does not
prejudice those who were not parties to the suit; and even if he, against whom
judgment was rendered, should become the heir of the person who gained .the
case, an exception, based on the fact that, under this judgment, he has failed
to effect what he undertook in his own name before he became the heir, cannot
be pleaded against him.
11. The Same, Opinions, Book XIII.
A man acknowledged as genuine certain notes which were, in fact, forged, and
paid them after judgment was rendered against him. I ask, if the truth should
subsequently be ascertained, and the notes found to be forged, and the
defendant should desire to prove this in accordance with the order of the
court, or an interlocutory decree; and, as he had admitted the genuineness of
the said notes, whether he could be opposed by an exception, as it is clearly
established by the Imperial Constitutions that although a judgment may be
obtained by means of forged documents, and they are afterwards ascertained to
be false, the fact that the matter has been decided cannot be pleaded in bar.
Modestinus answered that, for the reason
that payment was made through mistake, or security was furnished in the case of
these notes, which were afterwards alleged to be forged, there would be no
ground for an exception.
12. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXVIII.
Generally speaking, in questions dependent on preliminary decisions, he
sustains the part of a plaintiff whose claim is in accordance with what he
demands.
, 13. Julianus, Digest, Book L.
If, after judgment has been pronounced in a case involving an entire estate,
suit is brought to recover certain specified articles, it is settled that an
exception on the ground that the estate will be prejudged cannot be pleaded in
bar, for the reason that exceptions of this kind are introduced because they
may affect a future decree, if not the one which has already been rendered.
14. Alfenus Varus, Digest, Book II.
A son under paternal control sold a slave forming part of his peculium,and a
stipulation was made for the price. The slave was returned under a conditional
clause of the contract and afterwards died, and the father demanded from the
purchaser the money which the son had stipulated should be paid to him. It was
decided to be just that an exception in factumshould be pleaded against him,
setting forth that the money had been promised for the slave who had afterwards
been returned under a condition of the contract.
15. Julianus, On Urseius Ferox, Book IV.
A replication alleging bad faith should not be pleaded against an exception
founded upon an oath taken in court, as the Praetor should see that no question
is subsequently raised with reference to such an oath.
16. Africanus, Questions, Book IX.
You are in possession of the Titian Estate, and you and I have a lawsuit with
reference to the ownership of the same. I allege that there is due to this
estate a right of way through the Sempronian Estate, which belongs to you. If I
bring suit to recover the right of way, it is held that you can avail yourself
of an exception on the ground that the action pending for the ownership of the
property ought not to be prejudged; that is to say, that I cannot show that I
am entitled to the right of way before I have proved that the Titian Estate is
mine.
17. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LXX.
If, however, I bring an action to recover the right of way, and afterwards one
to recover the Titian Estate, as the objects of the litigation are distinct,
and the reasons for restitution different, the exception will cause no injury.
18. Africanus, Questions, Book IX.
I bring an action against you for half of a tract of land which you say is
yours, and I wish, at the same time, to bring one in partition against you
before the same judge. Again, if I allege that a tract of land of which you are
in possession is mine, and I wish to recover the crops from you, the question
arises whether an exception based on the principle that I ought not to bring a
suit, the decision of which will prejudge the case which involves the ownership
of all, or a part of the land in question, will operate as a bar, or should be
denied.
It is held that, in both instances, the Praetor should intervene, and not
permit the plaintiff to institute proceedings of this kind, before the question
of the ownership of the land has been determined.
19. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIII.
All exceptions to which the principal debtor is entitled can also be employed
by his surety, even against the consent of the former.
20. Paulus, On the Manner of Drawing up Formulas.
Exceptions are pleaded either because the party did what he should have done;
or because he did what he ought not to have done; or because he did not do what
he should have done. An exception on the ground of property sold and delivered,
or on that of res judicata,is granted for the reason that something has been
done which ought to have been done. An exception on the ground of fraud is
granted, because something has been done which ought not to have been done. An
exception on the ground that praetorian possession of property which has been
given has not been permitted, is granted because something was not done which
should be done.
21. Neratius, Parchments, Book IV.
One action is said to prejudge another, with reference to a larger sum of
money, when a question arises in court which is connected either wholly, or in
part, with a suit involving a larger amount of property.
 22. Paulus, Various Passages.
An exception is a proceeding which sometimes relieves the defendant from the
risk of having judgment rendered against him, and sometimes diminishes the
amount of the judgment.
(1) A replication opposes an exception, and is, as it were, an exception to an
exception.
23. Labeo, Epitomes of Probabilities by Paulus, Book HI.
Paulus: If anyone places a statue in a city with the intention that it shall
belong to the city, and afterwards desires to claim it in court, he can be
barred by an exception in factum.
24. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book VII.
A son under paternal control can acquire for his father an exception on the
ground of an oath having been taken, if he swears in court that his father does
not owe anything.

TITLE II. CONCERNING THE EXCEPTION BASED ON RES JUDICATA.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book II.
As judgments rendered between litigants cannot prejudice others who are not
parties to the suit, proceedings can be instituted under a will by which
freedom is granted, or a legacy is bequeathed, although the will may have been
broken, or may have been declared void, or may have been held not to have been
drawn in accordance with the prescribed legal formalities; but, still, if the
legatee should lose his case, the testamentary grant of freedom will not be
affected.
2. The Same, On the Edict, Book XIII.
Where an action is brought against the heir of a testator who passed over his
son in his will, and the plaintiff is barred by an exception on the ground that
the will is in such a condition that possession of the estate can be granted by
the Praetor contrary to its provisions, and the emancipated son has neglected
to apply for possession of the estate, it is not unjust that he should be
enabled again to institute proceedings against the heir. This was stated by
Julianus in the Fourth Book of the Digest.
3. The Same, On the Edict, Book XV.
Julianus, in the Third Book of the Digest, states that an exception on the
ground of res judicatacan be opposed whenever the same question again arises in
court between the same parties. Therefore, if anyone brings an action for the
entire estate, after having lost one, brought to recover a portion of the same,
or vice versa,he will be barred by an exception.
4. The Same, On the Edict, Book LXXII.
An exception on the ground of res judicatais tacitly understood to include all
those persons who are interested in the case.
5. The Same, On the Edict, Book LXXIV.
Proceedings are considered to be instituted with reference to the same
question, not only when a plaintiff does not make use of the same action which
he brought in the first place, but when he brings another relating to the same
matter. For instance, if anyone having brought an action on mandate should,
after his adversary promised to appear in court, bring one on the ground of
voluntary agency, or one for the recovery of the property, he institutes
proceedings relating to the same matter. Hence, it is very properly said that
he only does not institute proceedings with reference to the same matter who
does not again attempt to accomplish the same result. For when anyone changes
the action, he must also change the nature of his claim; as he is always
considered to bring suit with reference to the same matter, even if he has
recourse to a different kind of action from the one which he employed in the
first place.
6. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LXX.
It has very reasonably been held that one action is sufficient for the
settlement of a single controversy, and one judgment for the termination of a
case; otherwise, litigation would be enormously increased, and would be
productive of insurmountable difficulties, especially where conflicting
decisions have been rendered. It is therefore very common to introduce an
exception on the ground of res judicata.
1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXV.
If anyone, after having brought an action for all of certain property and lost
it, should then bring suit to recover a portion of the same, he will be barred
by an exception on the ground of res judicata;for a part is included in the
whole, and is considered the same thing where a portion of something is claimed
and all of it had previously been demanded. Nor does it make any difference
whether the claim is made for a certain article, or for a sum of money, or for
a right. Hence, if anyone sues to recover a tract of land, and afterwards
brings an action for a divided or an undivided portion of the same, it must be
said that he will be barred by an exception. Or if you suggest, as an example,
that I bring an action for a certain part of a tract of land, the whole of
which I have previously sued for, I will be barred by an exception.
The same rule must be adopted where, in the first place, suit is brought for
two different articles, and afterwards one is brought for either of them; as
the exception will operate as a bar. Likewise, if anyone brings an action to
recover a tract of land and, having lost it, he then brings one for the trees
which have been cut on said land, or if he, in the first place, brings suit for
a house, and subsequently brings one for the ground on which it stands, or the
lumber or stone of which it is built, the same rule will apply. This is also
the case if I, in the first place, bring suit for a ship, and then bring one to
recover the individual parts of which it is composed.
(1) If I bring an action to recover a female slave who is pregnant, and who
conceived and brought forth a child after issue was joined in the case, and I
then bring an action to recover the child, whether I shall be decided to have
asserted the same claim or a different one, is an important point. And, indeed,
it may be held that an action is brought for the same thing, wherever what was
demanded before the first judge is demanded before a second one. Therefore, in
almost all these cases, an exception will operate as a bar.
(2) A difference, however, exists with reference to the stone and timbers of
which a house is composed, for where anyone brings a suit for a house, and
loses it, and afterwards brings one for the stone or the timbers, or anything
else, as his property, he is in such a position that he will be considered to
have asserted a different claim, for a house may belong to a person who does
not own the stones of which it is constructed. Finally, where materials have
been used for the erection of a house belonging to another, the owner can
recover them after they have been separated from the building.
(3) The same question arises with reference to the crops, as where the child of
a female slave is involved. For these things are not yet in existence, still
they are derived from the property to recover which the action has been
brought; and the better opinion is that this exception will not apply to them.
It is, however, clear that if either the crops or the offspring of the slave
have been included in the restitution of the property, and their value has been
appraised, the result will be that an exception can be effectively interposed.
(4) And, generally speaking (as Julianus says), an exception on the ground of
res judicatawill operate as a bar whenever the same question is brought up
again in court between the same persons, or in a different kind of a case.
Hence, if after having brought suit to recover an estate, and lost it, the
plaintiff brings one to recover certain articles forming part of the estate; or
if, after having brought an action to recover certain articles belonging to it,
and failed, he then brings one to recover the entire estate, he will be barred
by an exception.
(5) The same rule should be adopted where anyone, having brought an action to
collect a claim from a debtor of an estate and lost it, brings one to recover
the entire estate; or, on the other hand, if, in the first place, he brought an
action to recover the estate, and afterwards brings one to collect a debt
forming a part of the assets of the same, an exception, in this instance, will
operate as a bar; for if I bring suit for an estate, all the property and
rights of action appertaining to it are considered to be included in the claim.
9. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXV.
If I bring suit against you for an estate and I am defeated, because you are
not in possession of any of it, and I again bring an action to recover it,
after you have obtained a portion of the same, can this exception be properly
pleaded against me? I think that the exception will not operate as a bar
whether it was decided that the estate was mine, or whether my adversary was
discharged from liability because he was not in possession of any part of it.
(1) If anyone, having defended his title to a tract of land of which he thought
he was in possession, and judgment being rendered for the plaintiff, the
defendant afterwards purchases the land, can the plaintiff be compelled to
restore it to him? Neratius says that if an exception on the ground of res
judicatais pleaded against him who brings suit for the land a second time, he
can reply that judgment was rendered in his favor.
(2) Julianus says that an exception on the ground of res judicatapasses from
the original party in interest to the purchaser, but does not revert from the
purchaser to the original party. Therefore, if you sell property belonging to
an estate, and I bring an action to recover said property from the purchaser,
and gain the case, I cannot plead the exception against you, if you bring suit
against me. But if the judgment was not rendered between the person to whom you
sold the property and myself.
10. Julianus, Digest, Book LI.
Or if I have lost my case, you will not be entitled to the exception against
me.
11. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXV.
If a mother should, under the Decree of the Senate, bring suit to recover the
estate of her minor son who is deceased, for the reason that she thought that,
the will of his father having been broken, no pupillary substitution could have
been made, and she should be defeated, because the will of the father had not
been broken, and, after the will had been opened, where the pupillary
substitution should appear, none was found to exist, and she again brings an
action for the estate, she will be barred by an exception on the ground of res
judicata;so Neratius says. I do not doubt that she will be barred by an
exception on the ground of res judicata,but relief should be granted her,
because she only advanced one point in her favor, namely, that the will of the
father had been broken.
(1) Finally, Celsus says that if I bring an action to recover a slave whom I
think is my property, because he was delivered to me by someone else, while, in
fact, he is mine, because he belongs to an estate which I have inherited, and I
bring a second action, after having lost the first, I can be barred by an
exception.
(2) If, however, anyone brings suit for land on the ground that Titius had
delivered it to him, and, having been defeated, afterwards sues for it on some
other ground, he should not be barred by an exception.
(3) Julianus also says, if you and I are heirs of Titius, and you bring an
action against Sempronius for part of a tract of land which you allege belongs
to the estate, and you are defeated, and I afterwards purchase the same part of
the land from Sempronius, I can interpose an exception against you by way of a
bar, if you bring suit iinnpartition against me, because the matter has been
judicially decided between you and my vendor. For if, before I bring suit for
the said part of the land, I should bring an action in partition, an exception
can be interposed on the ground that the matter between you and myself has been
disposed of in court.
(4) Where the origin of two claims is the same, it also makes a second demand
the same. But if I bring an action for a tract of land, or a slave, and lose my
case, and afterwards I should have a new cause of action from which I derive
ownership, I will not be barred by this exception, unless my ownership, having
been lost for the time being, is afterwards recovered by a certain species of
postliminium.But what if the slave whom I claim should be taken by the enemy,
and afterwards returns under the right of postliminium?In this instance I will
be barred by the exception, because the matter is understood to be the same;
but if I should have obtained the ownership for some other reason, the
exception will not operate as a bar. Therefore, if property is bequeathed to
me, under a condition, and while it is pending, having acquired the ownership
of it, I bring suit, and
I am defeated, and then, the condition having been fulfilled, I again sue to
recover the legacy, I think that an exception cannot be pleaded, because I
formerly had a different title to ownership than I have at present.
(5) Hence, if ownership is acquired after the first claim has been made, it
changes the nature of the case, but the change of the opinion of the plaintiff
does not do so; as, for example, if anyone thinks that he has the ownership of
property through inheritance, and changes his opinion, and believes that he is
entitled to it on account of a donation. This does not give rise to a new
claim, for no matter in what way, or where a person may have acquired the
ownership of the property, his right to it has finally been disposed of in the
first action.
(6) If anyone brings suit for the right to walk through the land of another,
and afterwards brings one to drive through the same land, I think that it can
be strongly maintained that one thing was asked for in the first place, and
another in the second, and therefore that an exception on the ground of res
judicatacannot be interposed.
(7) It is our practice, where an exception on the ground of res judicatais
pleaded, to include all the parties who have a right to bring the matter into
court with the plaintiff. Among these are the attorney who was directed to
bring the action, a guardian, the curator of an insane person or a minor, and
the officer who has charge of the business of a city.
On the side of the defendant, whoever undertakes the defence is included
because he who institutes proceedings against him brings a suit in court.
(8) Where anyone brings an action against a son under paternal control for the
recovery of a slave, and afterwards brings one against the father for the same
slave, there will be ground for this exception.
(9) If I bring suit against my neighbor to compel him to take care of his.
rain-water, and afterwards one of us should sell our land, and the purchaser
brings the same action, or it is brought against him, this exception will
operate as a bar, but only with reference to such work as has been performed
after the decision was rendered.
(10) Likewise, if Titius should give to Seius, by way of pledge, property which
he attempted to recover from you, and Seius afterwards should bring an action
on pledge against you, it must be ascertained when Titius pledged the property.
If he did so before bringing suit, the exception will not operate as a bar,
because he should have presented the claim, and I retain my right of action on
pledge unimpaired.
If, however, he pledged the property after he brought suit, the better opinion
is that an exception on the ground of res judicatawill operate as a bar.
12. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LXX.
When the question is asked whether or not this exception will operate as a bar,
it should be ascertained whether the same property is involved;
13. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXV.
Either the same amount, or the same right which was the subject of the first
action.
14. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LXX,
It should also be ascertained if the same cause of action exists, or the
persons are of the same rank, and if these things do not coincide, the case is
different. Where this exception is pleaded, the same property is understood to
be that which was the subject of the first action, even though its quality or
quantity may not have been absolutely preserved, and no addition to, or
deduction from it has been made, as the term should be accepted in its broadest
significance, on account of the welfare of the parties interested.
(1) Where anyone enjoys the usufruct of a portion of the property, and brings
suit to recover the entire usufruct, and loses his case, 3nd he then brings an
action for the other half of the usufruct, which has subsequently accrued to
him, he will not be barred by an exception, for the reason that the usufruct
does not accrue to a portion of the estate, but to the person himself x
(2) In cases of this kind, personal actions differ from real ones, for where
the same property is due to me from the same individual, each cause of action
is based on a separate obligation; and a judicial proceeding having reference
to one of them is not annulled by a similar demand for another. But when I
bring a real action without mentioning on what ground I allege the property to
be mine, all titles to it are included in the claim for one portion, because,
although the property cannot be mine more than once, it may be due to me
several times.
(3) Where anyone institutes proceedings under the interdict to recover
possession of property, and afterwards brings a real action, he will not be
barred by an exception, because proceedings to obtain possession under an
interdict, and a suit to determine the ownership of the property, are
different.
15. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XXX.
Where a suit involving an estate is pending between you and myself, and you
have in your possession some property belonging to said estate, and I also have
some, there is nothing to prevent me from bringing an action against you to
recover the estate, and, on the other hand, nothing to prevent you from
bringing an action against me for the same purpose. If, however, after the case
has been disposed of, you bring such an action against me, it will be necessary
to ascertain whether the estate was adjudged to be mine or yours. If it was
decided to be mine, the exception on the ground of res judicatawill operate as
a bar against you; because, for the very reason that judgment has been rendered
in my favor, and the estate found to belong to me, it has been decided not to
be yours. If, however, it has been found not to belong to me, nothing is
understood to have been determined with reference to your title to it, because
it may be that the estate does not belong to either of us.
16. Julianus, Digest, Book LI.
For it would be extremely unjust that an exception on the ground of res
judicatashould benefit the party against whom the judgment was rendered.
17. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XXX.
If I bring suit against you to recover property which belongs to me, and you
are discharged from all liability because you proved that you have ceased to
hold possession of said property, without any fraud on your part; and then,
after you have obtained possession of said property a second time, I again
bring an action against you, an exception on the ground of res judicatacannot
effectually be interposed against me.
18. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXX.
Where anyone brings suit for the production of property and his adversary is
discharged from liability because he was not in possession, and he having
afterwards regained possession, the owner brings suit a second time, an
exception on the ground of res judicatacan not properly be pleaded, because the
condition of the case is different.
19. Marcellus, Digest, Book XIX.
A certain man gave the same property in pledge at two different times, the
second creditor brought an action on pledge against the first one, and gained
the case, and the first afterwards brought a similar action against the second.
The question arose whether an exception on the ground of res judicatawould
operate as a bar. If the second creditor had pleaded the exception before the
property had been pledged to him, and he could advance nothing which was new
and valid, the exception would undoubtedly be a bar, for it brings up the same
point which had already been decided.
20. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XVI.
Where suit was brought under a will against the heir by a person to whom all
the family silver had been bequeathed, and who thought that only certain tables
had been left him, and brought into court solely the question of appraisement
of said tables, and afterwards sued to recover the money which had been left to
him, Trebatius says that he will not be barred by an exception, for the reason
that he did not bring suit for this in the first place, and did not intend to
do so, nor did the judge render any decision with reference to it.
21. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XXXI.
If silver plate has been bequeathed to me by will, and I bring an action
against the heir to recover it, and it should afterwards be ascertained that
the testator had also bequeathed to me his wardrobe by a codicil, the latter
legacy will not be affected by the former decision, because neither the parties
to the suit, nor the judge, understood that anything was in dispute except the
silver plate.
(1) If I bring suit to recover a flock of sheep, and I am defeated, and the
flock either increases or diminishes in number, and I again bring an action to
recover the same flock, an exception can effectually be interposed against me.
If I bring suit for any one of the animals composing the flock, and it is
present as part of the same, I think that the exception will still operate as a
bar.
(2) If you bring an action against anyone to recover Stichus and Pamphilus,
whom you allege are your slaves, and your adversary is discharged from
liability, and you again bring suit against him, claiming Stichus as your
slave, it is established that you will be barred by an exception.
(3) If I bring an action for a tract of land which I allege to be mine, and
afterwards bring one to recover the usufruct of the same, on the ground that,
as the land belongs to me, its usufruct is also mine, I will be barred by an
exception, because anyone who owns land cannot bring suit to recover the
usufruct of it. If, however, I bring an action to recover the usufruct, as
being mine, and afterwards, having obtained the ownership of the land, I again
sue for the usufruct, it can be said that the case is different; as, after I
obtained the land itself, the usufruct which I formerly enjoyed ceases to be
mine as a servitude, and again becomes my property by the right of ownership,
and, as it were, by a different title.
(4) If you become surety for my slave, and an action is brought against me on
account of his peculium,and I gain the case, and afterwards an action is
brought against you for the same cause, an exception on the ground of res
judicatacan be effectually pleaded.
22. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXI.
If an action on deposit is brought against an heir, and lost, the plaintiff can
bring one against the other heirs who cannot avail themselves of an exception
on the ground of res judicata.For although the same question is involved in
different actions, still the change of the parties against whom suit is
individually brought gives the case a different aspect. If a suit is brought
against the heir on account of fraud committed by the deceased, and afterwards
one is brought against him for some fraudulent act of his own, an exception on
the ground of res judicatawill not operate as a bar, because a different
question is involved.
23. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book III.
When an action only for the recovery of interest lost is brought, there need be
no apprehension that an exception on the ground of res judicatawill operate as
a bar in a suit for the principal, for, as it is rib advantage, neither, on the
other hand, will it be any impediment.
The same rule will apply where, in a bona fidecontract, the plaintiff wishes
only to collect the interest, for the interest still continues to run, because
as long as the contract in good faith stands it will. do so.
24. Julianus, Digest, Book IX.
Where anyone buys property from a person who is not its owner, and is
afterwards discharged from liability when the owner himself brings suit to
recover it, and the purchaser then loses possession of the property, and
institutes proceedings to recover it from the owner who has obtained possession
of the same, the latter can have recourse to an exception on the ground that
the property belongs to him, and the other can reply that it has not been
decided to be his.
25. The Same, Digest, Book LI.
If anyone who is not an heir should bring an action for the estate and, after
having become an heir, should again sue for the same estate, he will not be
barred by an exception on the ground of res judicata.
(1) It is in the power of a purchaser to bring an action to compel the property
to be returned within six months, where the condition was that if a slave was
worth less than he was sold for, the excess paid should be refunded; for this
latter action also includes the clause for the return of the money, when the
slave had such a defect that, on account of it, the purchaser would not have
bought him if he had been aware of it. Wherefore, it is very properly said that
if the purchaser who has made use of either one of these actions should
afterwards employ the other, he can be barred by an exception on the ground of
res judicata.
(2) If you interfere in my business, and bring an action for a tract of land in
my name, and I afterwards do not ratify the claim which you have made but
direct you to again bring an action to recover the same land, an exception on
the ground of res judicatawill not act as a bar when conditions have changed
since the mandate was given.
The same rule will apply where a personal action, and not a real one, is
brought.
26. Africanus, Questions, Book IX.
I brought an action against you alleging that I had a right to raise my house
ten feet higher, and lost it. I now bring one against you alleging that I Have
a right to raise my house twenty feet higher. An exception on the ground of res
judicatacan undoubtedly be pleaded. If I again bring suit alleging that I have
the right to raise my house still ten feet higher, an exception will operate as
a bar; for since I could not raise it to a lower height, I certainly would not
be entitled to raise it to a still higher one.
(1) Likewise, if having brought an action to recover a tract of land, and lost
it, the plaintiff brings suit for an island which was formed in a river
opposite said land, he will be barred by an exception.
27. Neratius, Parchments, Book VII.
When, in a second action, the question arises whether the property is the same
as that which was the object of the first one, the fol-
lowing things must be considered: first, the parties interested; second, the
property for which suit was brought; and third, the immediate cause of action.
For now it is of no consequence whether anyone believes that he has a good
cause of action, any more than if, after judgment had been rendered against
him, he should find new documents to strengthen his case.
28. Papinianus, Questions, Book XXVII.
An exception on the ground of res judicatawill bar one who succeeds to the
ownership of the party who lost the case.
29. The Same, Opinions, Book I.
An exception on the ground of res judicatawill not operate as a bar against a
co-heir who was not a party to the suit; and a slave, who has not yet been
manumitted under the terms of a trust, cannot be. again claimed as a slave,
after judgment has been rendered in favor of his freedom; but it is the duty of
the Praetor to see that the judgment is complied with in this case, as he
cannot decide in favor of the party who was defeated. For if suit to declare a
will inofficious has been brought against one of the co-heirs, or two co-heirs
have brought actions separately, and one of them gains his case, it has been
established that the grants of freedom must take effect; still, it is the duty
of the judge to provide for the indemnity of the party who is successful, and
who is to manumit the slave.
(1) If a debtor brings suit to determine the ownership of property, which he
pledged without notifying the creditor, and judgment is rendered against him,
the creditor will not be considered to occupy the place of the defeated party,
as the agreement with reference to the pledge preceded the decision.
30. Paulus, Questions, Book XIV.
A certain man who could succeed to it as heir at law, having been appointed
heir to the sixth part of an estate, contested the legality of the will, and
having demanded half of the estate from one of the appointed heirs, lost his
case. He is held to have included the sixth part of the estate in his claim,
and therefore, if he brought suit for the same share under the same will, an
exception on the ground of res judicatawill operate as a bar against him.
(1) Latinus Largus: A transaction took place with reference to an estate which
belonged to Maevius, but whose right to it was disputed by Titius, and a
transfer of the property of the estate was made by Titius to Mrevius, as the
heir, in which transfer a certain tract of land which, several years before,
had been hypothecated to the grandfather of Maevius, and afterwards to another
person was delivered, in pursuance of the contract. These matters having been
settled, the second creditor of Titius brought suit for his claim, and gained
it. After this judgment, Msevius found among the papers of his grandfather the
note executed by Titius, by which it appeared that the land which was included
in the said transaction had also been encum-
bered by the said Titius to his grandfather. Therefore, as it was evident that
the land formerly hypothecated to the grandfather of Msevius, the heir, was the
same as that on account of which Msevius had a judgment rendered against him in
favor of the second creditor, I ask whether the right of his grandfather, of
which he was ignorant at the time that the action was brought to recover the
land, could not be barred by pleading an exception. I answered that if the
ownership of the land was in question, and a decision was rendered in favor of
the said creditor, we should hold that an exception on the ground of res
judicatawould operate as a bar against the party who lost the former suit
bringing another, because as the plaintiff had been successful, the question
appears to be the same one previously involved.
If, however, the person in possession should be discharged from liability, and,
having lost possession, should bring suit to recover it from the same party who
was not successful in the first place, he will not be barred by an exception,
for in the judgment rendered in his favor, nothing was decided with reference
to his title. When, however, the action on pledge was brought against the first
creditor, no question might happen to be raised as to the title of the party in
possession, because in controversies having reference to ownership, what was
decided to be mine is at the same time decided not to belong to another; but,
in the case of an obligation, the result will be that, where property is
encumbered in favor of one person, it does not follow that it is not encumbered
to another, if the latter can prove that this is the fact.
It may be said, that it is probable that an exception will not operate as a
bar, as there was no doubt as to the right of the possessor, but only as to the
encumbrance. In the case stated, however, the point which presents the greatest
difficulty to me is whether the right of pledge is extinguished, when the
ownership of property is acquired; for the right of pledge cannot continue to
exist where the creditor becomes the owner of the property. An action on
pledge, however, will lie, because it is true that the property was pledged and
the claim was not satisfied. For which reason I do not think that an exception
on the ground of res judicatawill operate as a bar.
31. The Same, Opinions, Book HI.
Paulus held that an exception on the ground of res judicatacould not be
effectually pleaded against anyone who brought a personal action for the
recovery of property, who had previously brought an action for the same
property and lost it.

TITLE III.
CONCERNING DIFFERENT TEMPORARY EXCEPTIONS AND THE UNION OF SEVERAL POSSESSIONS.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXIV.
For the reason that a" discussion frequently arises with reference to available
days, let us see in what the power to maintain one's
rights consists. In the first place, it is requisite for the plaintiff to have
power to bring an action, for it is not sufficient for the defendant to be able
to himself make a defence, or employ someone who can properly do so for him,
but the plaintiff also must not be prevented by any lawful reason from
instituting proceedings. Hence, if he is in the hands of the enemy, or absent
on business for the State, or is in prison, or if he is detained somewhere by a
storm so that he cannot bring the suit, or direct this to be done, he is held
not to have the power to do so. It is clear that a person who is prevented by
illness, but is able to direct suit to be brought, should be considered as
having the power to do so. There is no one who is not aware that he who has not
the opportunity of appearing before the Praetor has not the power to bring an
action. Hence only those days are available on which the Praetor dispenses
justice.
2. Marcellus, Digest, Book VI.
The question is asked whether or not the intercalary day should be counted in
favor of the party against whom judgment was rendered, in the time prescribed
for levying execution on the judgment. Should it also be included in the time
fixed by law for the right of action to be extinguished ? It should undoubtedly
be held that the time is prolonged by the intercalary day; for instance, where
a question arises with reference to usucaption which is to be completed within
a prescribed period, or to actions which must be brought within a certain time,
as is the case with the greater portion of those which have reference to the
acts of the Jildiles.
If, however, anyone should sell a tract of land under the condition that,
unless the price was paid within thirty days, the sale should be void, will the
purchaser be entitled to the benefit of the intercalary day? I hold that he
will not.
3. Modestinus, Differences, Book VI.
It is clear that prescription based upon long possession applies to land as
well as to slaves.
4. Javolenus, Epistles, Book VII.
If a slave belonging to an estate, or to anyone who is in the hands of the
enemy, should receive security for the payment of a debt, the time prescribed
for said security begins to run immediately; for we must ascertain not whether
he who placed a lien on the property can bring an action, but whether the
person in whose favor it was encumbered has a right to do so against the
former. Otherwise, it would be extremely unjust if, on account of the rank of
the plaintiffs, the obligations of the defendants should be prolonged, since
nothing can be done by them to prevent suit from being brought against them.
5. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book III.
Let us see whether any defect in the title of the plaintiff, or of the donor,
or the testator who bequeathed me property, will prejudice
my rights, if he did not have a good title to its possession in the first
place. I think that it will neither be of any disadvantage nor of any benefit
to me, for I can acquire by usucaption something which the party from whom I
obtain the property cannot acquire in that manner. (1) The following case has
been proposed. A certain woman sold an article after having pledged it, and her
heir redeemed it. The question arises whether the heir can make use of an
exception on the ground of long possession against the creditor attempting to
obtain possession of the pledge. I held that this heir who redeemed the pledge
from a third party can avail himself of the exception, because he succeeds to
the place of the latter, and not to that of him who pledged the property. The
case is the same as if he had redeemed the property and subsequently became the
heir.
6. Africanus, Questions, Book IX.
If I sell the same property, separately, to two persons, the purchaser to whom
it was first delivered will be the only one who will profit by the possession.
For if I sell you anything, and afterwards purchase it from you, and then sell
it to Titius, he will be entitled to the benefit of both your possession and
mine, because you are obliged to give possession to me, and I am obliged to
transfer it to him.
(1) I sold you a slave, and it was agreed between us that unless the price was
paid by a certain date, the sale should be considered void. As this actually
took place, the question arose what opinion should be given with reference to
the additional time you held the slave. The answer was, that the same rule
should be observed as in the case where the property is returned under a
condition; for it is just as if you had sold me the slave a second time, and,
when the vendor afterwards obtained possession of him, the time which preceded
the sale was added to that during which the slave was held by the party by whom
he was returned.
7. Marcianus, Institutes, Book HI.
Where anyone has fished for years in a certain place in a public river, he
excludes another from enjoying the same right.
8. Ulpianus, Rules, Book I.
In computing the addition of the time of possession, it is true that the master
is entitled to the benefit of the time during which the slave was in flight.
9. Marcianus, Rules, Book V.
It is provided by certain Rescripts of the Divine Antoninus that there is
ground for prescription, where long-continued possession of movable property
has existed.
10. Pomponius, Opinions, Book XIII.
An "informer, having notified the Treasury of certain property which had had no
owner within the prescribed four years, desisted,
after having given notice. After the four years had elapsed, a second informer
having appeared, the first notice will not be available to prevent possession
from being barred by lapse of time, unless the collusion of the first informer
can be established, and this having been done, the prescription, as well as
everything else relating to the affair, will be annulled.
(1) The term of four years which is fixed for notifying the Treasury of the
existence of property without ownership is not computed according to mere
opinion, but with reference to the character of the unoccupied property. The
four years are reckoned from the time when a will is decided to be of no
effect; or the possession of an intestate estate has been rejected by all those
who had the right to claim it, in the regular order of succession; or where the
time prescribed for each of them to do so had expired.
11. The Same, Definitions, Book II.
Where an heir succeeds to all the rights of the deceased, his ignorance does
not affect any defective title of the latter; for example, if the deceased knew
that the property belonged to another, he held possession of it by a precarious
title. For, although such a title does not bind the heir who was not aware of
it, and proceedings under the interdict cannot properly be brought against him,
still, he cannot acquire the property by usucaption, as the deceased was unable
to do so.
The same rule of law applies where property is claimed on the ground of long-
continued possession, for an action cannot legally be defended where, in the
beginning, it was not founded on a bona fidetitle.
12. Paulus, Opinions, Book XVI.
A creditor, who could have been barred from the possession of his pledge by
lapse of time, sold the pledge. I ask whether the possessor could legally avail
himself of an exception against the purchaser. Paulus answered that this
exception could also be pleaded against the purchaser.
13. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book VI.
In all matters in which the Treasury is interested, prescription for twenty
years is available, except in cases where a shorter time has been expressly
provided by the Imperial Constitutions.
(1) Any accounts which have been duly assigned and cancelled cannot be produced
against the person responsible for them, after twenty years, or against his
heir after ten years have elapsed.
14. Scxvola, Questions Publicly Discussed, Book II.
We cannot lay down any rules of general or perpetual application with reference
to the union of one possession to another, for this depends upon equity alone.
(1) It is clear that such a union is granted to those who succeed to us, even
by virtue of a contract, or under a will. The addition of
the time when the property was possessed by a testator is granted to the heirs,
and to those who occupy the place of his successors.
(2) Therefore, if you sell me a slave, I can add the time during which he was
in your possession.
(3) If you have given me an article in pledge, and I myself pledge it to
someone else, my creditor will be entitled to the addition of the time during
which you had possession of it, not only against a third party, but also
against you yourself, so long as you did not pay me; for when anyone has the
preference over me, as I have over you, there is much more reason to hold that
he should be preferred to you. If, however, you should pay me the money, he
cannot, under such circumstances, benefit by the time that the property
remained in your hands.
(4) Likewise, if, during your absence, someone who is considered to have charge
of your business should sell me a slave, and you ratify his act after your
return, I can certainly profit by the time during which he was in your
possession.
Again, if you give me property in pledge, and it is agreed between us that, if
you do not pay the money, I can sell the pledge under the contract, and I do
sell it, the purchaser will be entitled to the addition of the time that the
property was in your possession, even though the pledge was sold without your
permission, for when you made the contract it is held that you consented to the
sale, if you should not pay the money.
15. Venuleius, Interdicts, Book V.
In the case of usucaption, the rule is observed that if the property is in
possession only for a moment during the last day, the usucaption is,
nevertheless, completed; for the entire day is not required for the completion
of the prescribed time.
(1) The addition of time of possession not only includes that during which the
property remained in the hands of the vendor but also the time that the
purchaser held it, where the latter also disposed of it. If, however, one of
the vendors was not a bona fidepossessor, the possession of those who preceded
him will be of no advantage, because the possession is not continuous, just as
the possession of a vendor cannot be added to that of someone who is not in
possession.
(2) It must also be added that, if you purchased the property yourself, or
ordered someone else to do so, and he also directed it to be sold to a third
party, continuity of possession is necessary. If, however, he who is directed
to sell the property, should direct another to sell it, Labeo says that the
addition of possession of him who gave the second mandate should not be
allowed, unless the owner consents for this to be done.
(3) But if I purchase property from a son under paternal control, or from a
slave, the addition of the time during which it was in possession of the
father, or the master, should be granted me, if the property was sold either
with the consent of the father or the master,
or as part of the peculiumof the slave who was entrusted with its
administration.
(4) The time of possession by a ward is also added to that of a person who
purchased the property from his guardian. The same rule should be observed in
the case of anyone who buys property from the curator of a minor or an insane
person. If the sale has been made in behalf of an unborn child, or because
possession of the property has been obtained for the purpose of its
preservation, or it is diminished on account of a dowry, this addition of the
time of possession will also be permitted.
(5) These rules relating to additions of the time of possession are not
understood to be as comprehensive as their language indicates; for, even if the
property remains in the hands of the vendor after its sale and delivery, the
purchaser will only be entitled to the benefit of the time which preceded the
sale, even though the vendor did not have the property in his possession when
it was sold.
(6) Where an heir sells to anyone property belonging to the estate, the latter
will be entitled to the benefit of the time it remained in the hands of the
heir, as well as to that during which it was in the possession of the deceased.
16. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book III.
Any period of possession to which our own possession can not be added will be
of no benefit whatever to us.

TITLE IV.
CONCERNING THE EXCEPTION FOUNDED ON FRAUD AND FEAR.

1. Paulus, On the Edict, Book VII.
In order that this exception may be more clearly understood, let us first
consider the reason why it was introduced, and afterwards ascertain how fraud
can be committed. By this means we will learn when this exception operates as a
bar, and also against what persons it can be employed. Finally, we shall
examine within what time it must be pleaded.
(1) The Praetor introduced this exception in order that no one could, by means
of the Civil Law, profit by his own fraud against the rules of natural equity.
(2) In order to ascertain whether a fraudulent act has been committed, the
facts of the case must be taken into consideration.
(3) Fraud is committed in contracts, in wills, and in the execution, of the
laws.
2. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXVI.
It is clear that this exception was formulated forthe same reason that the
action on the ground of bad faith was introduced.
(1) In the next place, let us see in what cases there is ground for this
exception, and against whom it may be pleaded. And, indeed,
it must be noted, that he whose fraudulent act is complained of must be
expressly mentioned, and that the formula in rem,"If any fraudulent act has
been committed with reference to the matter," should not be employed, but the
following one, namely, "If no fraud has been committed by you as plaintiff."
Therefore, the party who pleads the exception must prove that the plaintiff has
been guilty of fraud, and it will not be sufficient for him to show that fraud
has merely been committed with reference to the case; or, if he alleges it has
been committed by certain persons, he must specifically enumerate them;
provided they are the parties responsible for the act by which he alleges that
he has been injured.
(2) It is evident that the exception is employed in a proceeding in remif we
take into account the person who pleads it, for there is no doubt against whom
the fraud was committed, but there is one as to whether or not the plaintiff
committed it.
(3) The following matters may be discussed with reference to the First Section,
where the causes giving rise to the exception are enumerated. If anyone
stipulates with another without any consideration, and then institutes
proceedings by virtue of this agreement, an exception on the ground of fraud
can properly be pleaded against him; for although, at the time that the
stipulation was entered into, he may not have been guilty of any fraudulent
act, still it must be said that he committed fraud when he joined issue in the
case, and persisted in asserting his claim under the said stipulation.
And even if, at the time that the stipulation was made, he had a just cause of
action, still it is held that one did not exist at the time of the joinder of
issue. Hence, if anyone about to lend money enters into a stipulation, and the
money is not lent, although there was a good consideration for the contract,
still, as it was not executed, or was terminated, it must be said that the
exception can be properly pleaded.
(4) The question is also asked, if anyone should stipulate absolutely for the
payment of a certain sum of money, for the reason that this was the intention
of the parties; but, after the stipulation was entered into, it was agreed that
the money should not be demanded until a certain time, will an exception on the
ground of fraud operate as a bar. And, indeed, there is no doubt whatever that
an exception can be pleaded on the ground of an informal contract, as anyone
who wishes to make use of this exception can do so; for it cannot be denied
that he who makes a demand in violation of a contract which he entered into is
guilty of fraud.
(5) Generally speaking, it should be noted that, in all cases where exceptions
in factumare available, an exception on the ground of fraud can be pleaded in
bar, because anyone is guilty of fraud who makes a demand ,which can be
successfully opposed by any exception whatever; for if he did not commit fraud
in the beginning, still, by making- .the claim now he is acting fraudulently,
unless he was so ignorant of the facts as not to be guilty of bad faith.
(6) It has not improperly been asked, if a creditor accepts interest in advance
on a loan, and persists in demanding payment of the principal before the time
has passed for which he has collected the interest, whether he can be barred by
an exception on the ground of fraud. It may be said that he is guilty of fraud,
for by accepting the interest he is understood to have deferred collection of
the debt until the time had elapsed for which interest was paid, and that he
tacitly agreed not to demand payment in the meantime.
(7) The question also arises, if anyone should buy a slave who was to be free
on condition of paying ten aurei,and the purchaser, being ignorant of this
fact, stipulated that, in case of the eviction of the slave, he should be
entitled to double his price, and then received the ten aureifrom the slave,
and as the latter had been evicted, and had obtained his freedom, whether the
purchaser could bring an action for double the amount by virtue of the
stipulation. He would be barred by an exception, unless he deducted the ten
aureiwhich he received for the purpose of complying with the condition. This
was also stated by Julianus.
If, however, the slave had paid the money out of the property of the purchaser,
or out of his peculiumwhich belonged to the latter, it may be said that an
exception could not properly be pleaded, because he was not guilty of fraud.
3. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LXXI.
But if, before the ownership of the slave was transferred to me, he should pay
the ten aureito the vendor, and I should bring an action on purchase in order
to recover the ten aurei,I think that I would be entitled to this action, if I
was ready to release him from the stipulation to pay double the amount of the
price.
4. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXVI.
The question is asked by Celsus, if the creditors of an estate, with a single
exception, should direct Titius to enter upon it, and this one did this for the
purpose of deceiving him, but would also have directed him to accept if he had
known that Titius would not have consented to do so, and he then brings an
action, will he be barred by an exception? Celsus says that he will be barred.
(1) Julianus asks, if a man who is ill promises a hundred aureito his wife's
cousin, with the understanding that the money shall come into the hands of his
wife, and he afterwards recovers, whether he can plead an exception on the
ground of bad faith when suit is brought against him. Julianus says that it was
held by Labeo that he could interpose an exception on the ground of fraud.
(2) If we should consent to a compromise, and appoint an arbiter, " and I do
not appear at the appointed time, on account of bad health, and the penalty
becomes due, can I avail myself of an exception on the ground of bad faith?
Pomponius says that I will be entitled to the benefit of such an exception.
(3) It is also asked, what course must be pursued if you com--promise with a
debtor who owes you the sum of sixty aurei,and
through mistake you stipulate for the penalty of a hundred? Labeo holds that it
is the duty of the arbiter to order as much to be paid to you as is actually
due, and if this is not done, there is no reason why the excess should not be
collected. But he also says, that even if the arbiter failed to state the
amount which should be collected, and the penalty should be demanded, an
exception on the ground of fraud can be pleaded.
(4) If a debtor pays a ward what he owes him, without the authority of his
guardian, and the ward becomes enriched to that extent by this payment, it is
very properly held that if he attempts to collect the amount a second time, he
will be barred by an exception. For if he was pecuniarily benefited by having
loaned money, or by having obtained it by means of some other contract, an
exception should be granted.
The same rule must be said to apply to all other cases in which payment is
illegally made, for if the parties are pecuniarily benefited there will be
ground for an exception.
(5) Labeo also says that if anyone should purchase a slave knowing that he had
the habit of running away, and stipulated with the vendor that this was not the
case, and he afterwards brings an action based on the stipulation, he cannot be
barred by an exception, as this was the agreement, although he will not be
entitled to an action on purchase. If, however, such an agreement was not made,
he will be barred by an exception.
(6) A certain man to whom money was due settled the account with his debtor,
and sold his claim to Seius, whom the debtor had directed to purchase it, and
the purchaser entered into a stipulation with reference to the transaction, and
the creditor then retains the money which he had obtained by a judgment. Can
the purchaser bring an action under the stipulation? Ofilius holds that if the
vendor of the claim was not ready to pay over the entire amount which he
received from the purchaser, an exception on the ground of fraud cannot be
properly pleaded against him. I think that the opinion of Ofilius is correct.
(7) Labeo says that where suit has been brought for a slave, and judgment
rendered in favor of the plaintiff, and security given by order of court for
the slave to be delivered within a certain time, and a penalty has been
stipulated for if he should not be delivered, the plaintiff will be barred by
an exception if he claims both the slave and the penalty; for to retain
possession of the slave and also to exact the penalty would be unjust.
(8) If I give you valuable pearls in pledge, and it is agreed between us that
they shall be returned when the debt is paid, and the pearls are lost through
your negligence, the question arises whether you can collect the money. An
opinion of Nerva and Atilicinus is extant, who hold that I am entitled to an
exception, as follows, "If no agreement was made between you and myself that
the pearls should be returned to me if the money was paid." The better opinion,
however, is that an exception on the ground of fraud can be pleaded in bar.
(9) If a minor should give me a young slave, and afterwards bring an action to
recover him, he can be barred by an exception on the ground of fraud, unless he
repays the amount furnished for his support, and any other reasonable expenses
incurred on account of said slave.
(10) It should, moreover, be noted that if anyone brings suit under a will,
against the wishes of the deceased, he can be barred by an exception on the
ground of fraud. Hence, an heir can be barred by an exception of this kind, if
he acts contrary to the wishes of the deceased.
(11) Where an heir was appointed to the twelfth of an estate, which might be
worth two hundred aurei,but preferred to receive a legacy instead, which was
only worth a hundred, and did this to avoid being annoyed by the settlement of
the estate, and brings an action to recover the legacy, can he be barred by an
exception on the ground of fraud? Julianus says that he cannot. But if he
received the amount, or what might be considered equivalent to it, from a
substituted heir, in order to avoid accepting the estate, and then brings an
action to recover the legacy, Julianus says that he is considered to be guilty
of fraud, and can be barred by an exception on this ground.
(12) Where I have the usufruct of a tract of land, arid you sell me the land
with my consent, the question arises whether I can be opposed by an exception
if I bring suit to recover the usufruct? It is our practice that this
exception, which is based on bad faith, operates as a bar.
(13) Marcellus says that a replication on the ground of bad faith should not be
granted against an exception on the same ground. Labeo concurs in this opinion,
for he says that, as both parties are guilty of bad faith, it would be unjust
for an advantage to be obtained by the plaintiff and a penalty imposed upon the
defendant, for it is far more equitable that the plaintiff should not reap any
benefit from a matter in which he has acted deceitfully.
(14) There is no doubt that a replication on the ground of bad faith can be
granted against the exception of the Macedonian Decree of the Senate, and it is
also provided by the Imperial Constitutions and set forth in the opinions of
various authorities that such a replication has the effect of a plea in bar.
(15) Labeo says that, although an action based on a stipulation will lie by
virtue of the clause relating to fraud which it contains, still an exception on
the ground of fraud may be properly pleaded, if, as he says, anything has been
done contrary to the terms of the agreement; for it might be that the
plaintiff, before the stipulation was entered into, did not commit any
fraudulent act, but did so at the time that he asserted the claim on account of
which an exception was necessary.
(16) Neither an exception on the ground of fraud, nor any other which can
unfavorably affect the reputation of a patron or a relative in the ascending
line, can be pleaded against them. Still an exception in factumcan be pleaded,
for instance, if it is alleged that the money forming the basis of the claim
was not paid, an exception on this ground may be interposed. It, however, makes
no difference whether a patron is sued on his own contract, or on one made by
another, for respect must always be shown to him living or dead. If, however, a
patron brings an action against the heir of his freedman, I think that the
latter can interpose an exception based on the bad faith of the patron.
The freedman himself, however, can, by no means, plead an exception based on
the bad faith of his patron, even if he is sued by the heir of the latter, for
it is proper that honor should be shown by a freedman to his patron not only
while he is living, but also after his death.
It is clear that a clause relating to fraudulent conduct should not be omitted
from the stipulation, because an action on fraud arising from such a clause is
not brought, but one is brought by virtue of the stipulation.
(17) We can make use of this exception both on account of the fraudulent
conduct of a slave, or of any other person subject to our authority, as well as
of those by whose fraudulent acts we acquire anything. So far as the fraudulent
conduct of slaves and children is concerned, if any action is brought having
reference to their peculium,this exception should be pleaded in every instance.
If, however, the peculiumis not involved, an exception on the ground of bad
faith should only be interposed with reference to the matter in question, and
not where some fraud was committed afterwards; for it would not be just for the
fraudulent acts of the slave to injure his master more than where he made use
of his services.
(18) The question arose whether an exception on the ground of bad faith can be
pleaded in the case of an agent who has only been appointed to bring the suit.
I think that it can be properly maintained that if the said agent was appointed
for the purpose of acting in his own behalf (that is to say, if he should
commit any fraudulent act before issue was joined), an exception on this ground
can be interposed.1 If, however, he was not acting in his own behalf, an excep-
1 It was a general rule of the Roman law that Cessio Nominum,or the assignment
of obligations, was not valid without the consent of the debtor. As this was
not always obtainable, the same result was accomplished by the transfer of the
right of action accompanied by a mandate to the assignee, or agent, or collect
the claim, and retain as his own whatever the court allowed him. For this
reason he was called "Procurator in rem, suam,"or "Agent for his own affairs."
Alienation of claims, under these circumstances, could be made in any way that
transferred the title, that is, by sale, gift, or exchange; and by any person
in whom the right was vested either directly, or in a fiduciary capacity, the
assignment in the latter instance not being optional, but compulsory.
In order to protect debtors from being harassed by persons buying up claims for
speculative purposes, decrees were issued from time to time by the Emperors,
prohibiting assignees from collecting any more than they had paid, together
with
tion can be pleaded only with reference to the fraud committed since
proceedings were begun. But when the agent is one to whom the administration of
all the business of the principal has been entrusted, Neratius says that an
exception can be pleaded on account of any fraudulent act which he may have
committed.
(19) I directed Titius to enter into a stipulation for you, Titius afterwards
directed Seius to do so, and Seius stipulated for you, and brought suit. Labeo
says that you can effectually interpose an exception based on my fraudulent act
as well as on that of Seius.
(20) It is also asked, if my debtor should swindle you, and appoint you in his
place, and I having made a stipulation with you, bring an action to enforce it,
will an exception on the ground of fraud operate as a bar? The better opinion
is, that you will not be permitted to plead an exception against me on the
ground of the bad faith of my debtor, as I did not swindle you, but you can
bring an action on that ground against my debtor.
(21) If, however, a woman should delegate her debtor to her husband, for her
dowry, after she had been guilty of fraud, the same rule should be adopted, and
the debtor should not be permitted to plead an exception based on the
fraudulent conduct of the woman, for fear that she might remain unendowed.
(22) In a case where the heir of a father-in-law is sued to recover a dowry,
and pleads an exception based on the fraud of the husband and wife for whose
benefit the money is claimed, the question was asked by Julianus whether the
exception will operate as a bar, so far as the woman is personally concerned.
Julianus says that if the husband sues the heir of his father-in-law for the
dowry, and the latter pleads an exception on the ground of fraud committed by
the daughter, by whom the money would be obtained, the exception will be
effective as a bar; for he holds that the dowry which the husband demands from
the heir of the father-in-law is understood to be acquired by the daughter who,
by means of it, will obtain her dowry. He does not state whether the heir can
also plead an exception based on the fraudulent conduct of the husband. I
think, however, that he was also of the opinion that an exception based on the
fraud of the husband would operate as a bar, although in this_ instance, as he
says, it could not be held that a dowry was acquired by the daughter.
the legal interest, except in transactions between co-heirs, or members of the
same family. The remedy for this abuse was first introduced during the reign of
Anastasmus, about the beginning of the sixth century. .
The assignment of a claim included all rights attaching to, or growing out of it, and made the assignee liable to all judicial proceedings available against
the assignor, in addition to any which might be employed against himself
individually. To establish the validity of the transfer, it was absolutely
essential that the condition of the debtor should not thereby be rendered worse
than it had previously been. No guarantee as to the solvency of the latter was
required, or expected; but it was indispensable that the assignor should
warrant that the claim was not fictitious. The assignment, of course,
extinguished the obligation, as far as the' original debtor and creditor were
concerned. --- ED.
(23) The question whether an exception based on the fraud of a guardian can be
effectually pleaded against a ward who brings an action has been discussed by
several authorities. I think that even though the interest of wards is favored
by such persons, it should still be held that, where anyone fraudulently
purchases the property of a ward from his guardian, or makes a fraudulent
contract with him concerning the property of his ward, or where the guardian is
guilty of any other fraudulent conduct, and the ward is pecuniarily benefited
thereby, the latter should be barred by an exception. Nor is it necessary to
make any inquiry as to whether security has been given to the ward or not, or
whether his guardian is solvent or insolvent, provided he is administering the
affairs of the guardianship; for how can he who enters into a contract with a
guardian divine these things? If you suggest that someone has entered into
collusion with the guardian it is clear that he will be injured by his own act.
(24) If someone who was not the guardian, but acted as such, is guilty of
fraud, let us see whether it will injure the ward. I do not think that it will
do so, for when, a person who is transacting the business of a guardian sells
any property belonging to the ward, and it is obtained by usucaption, the ward
will not be prevented from following his own property by an exception, even if
he was furnished security, because the administration of his affairs was not
granted to this individual. According to this, I think that an exception based
on the fraud of the guardian can be pleaded against the ward.
(25), What we have stated with reference to a guardian can also be said to
apply to the curator of an insane person, as well as to the case of a
spendthrift, and a minor under the age of twenty-five years.
(26) An exception based on fraud committed by a minor of twenty-five years of
age can also be pleaded, for sometimes such an exception can undoubtedly be
interposed if the minor is of an age when he can legally be guilty of a
fraudulent act. Julianus very frequently stated that minors who are near the
age of puberty are capable of committing fraud. But what if the debtor of a
ward pays a creditor of the latter, to whom he had been delegated? He says that
it must be supposed that the ward has arrived at puberty, to avoid the debtor
being liable to pay the money twice, under the pretext that the ward does not
know what fraud is.
The same rule should be observed in the case of an insane person, if, when he
was presumed to be of sound mind, he should order his debtor to pay one of his
creditors, or if he should have in his house the money for a debt which he has
collected.
(27) An exception based on the fraud of the vendor cannot be pleaded against
the purchaser. If, however, the latter should avail himself of the addition of
the time that the property was in the possession of the vendor, it seems to be
perfectly just that he should be responsible for the fraud of the vendor, as he
profits by his possession in this way. And, likewise, it is held that an
exception which
has reference to the property will bar the purchaser, but one which is based
upon an offence committed by the person will not do so.
(28) If the estate of Gaius Seius should come into your hands as the heir at
law, and I should be appointed heir, and you fraudulently persuade me not to
accept the estate, and I afterwards reject it, and you assign your rights to
Sempronius after having been paid by him, and he brings suit against me to
recover the estate, an exception on the ground of fraud committed by the person
who assigned him his rights cannot be pleaded by me against Sempronius.
(29) If, however, anyone claims an estate by virtue of a legacy, or he to whom
property was given by way of donation does so, can an exception on the ground
of fraud committed by the party whom he succeeded be pleaded against him?
Pomponius thinks that he would be barred by such an exception. I also think
that those should be barred who are pecuniarily benefited by obtaining such
rights, for it is one thing to purchase them, and another to succeed to them.
(30) Pomponius discusses the same question with reference to anyone who
receives property in pledge, where the Servian or Hy-pothecary Action is
brought, for he holds that he should be barred because otherwise the property
would revert to the person who was guilty of fraud.
(31) The bad faith of the vendor, however, as we have already stated, cannot be
pleaded against the purchaser. We observe this rule only with reference to
purchasers, and to those who have exchanged property, or received it in
payment, as well as to such as occupy the position of purchasers. If, however,
a slave has been surrendered by way of reparation for damage, Pomponius thinks
that the person who demands the slave, as well as the one who gave him up can
have the exception pleaded against him.
Hence, where anyone is pecuniarily benefited by acquiring property in any way
whatever, an exception on the ground of fraud committed by the person to whose
rights he succeeds can be pleaded against him. For it is sufficient if he who
has paid the price, or something instead of it, and is a bona fidepurchaser,
should not suffer through the bad faith of the vendor, provided he himself is
not guilty of fraud. If, however, he himself is not free from fraud, he will be
liable to the exception on that ground, and must suffer for his own fraudulent
act.
(32) If you purchase a tract of land from Titius, which belongs to Sempronius,
and it is delivered to you when you pay the price, and Titius afterwards
becomes the heir of Sempronius, and sells and delivers the same land to
Msevius, Julianus says that the Prsetor must protect you in your rights*
because if Titius himself should sue you to recover the land, he will be barred
by an exception in factum,on the ground of fraud. If Titius himself should be
in possession of the land, and you should sue him by the Publician Action, and
he should plead an exception against you on the ground that the property is
his, you can avail yourself of a replication, as from this it is evident-that
he, a second time, sold land which did not belong to him.
(33) Cassius did not introduce an exception on the ground of fear, but was
content with that based on fraud, which is one of general application. It,
however, seems more proper to establish an exception on the ground of fear as a
plea in bar; as this, in some respects, differs from one based on fraud,
because the latter includes the person of the party who committed the fraud,
for an exception on the ground of fraud is a proceeding in rem; as,for
instance, "where no act has been committed through fear," so that we do not
examine whether the party who brings the action did anything to cause fear, but
whether anything was done in the transaction by any person whomsoever, and not
merely by the plaintiff, for the purpose of intimidating the defendant. And,
although an exception on the ground of the fraud of the vendor cannot be
pleaded against the purchaser, still, it is our practice to hold that an
exception can be pleaded in bar, where fear has been caused not only by the
vendor, but by anyone whomsoever.
(34) It should be noted that this exception on the ground of fear ought not to
be pleaded where a son has been intimidated by his father, while under his
control. The father, however, is permitted to diminish the amount of the
peculiumof the son, but if the latter should reject the paternal estate, relief
should be granted him, as is ordinarily done.
5. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XVII.
You owe me ten aureiunconditionally. I bequeath you that sum under a condition.
If, in the meantime, my heir should bring an action to collect the amount you
owe the estate, he cannot be barred by an exception on the ground of bad faith,
as the condition may fail to be fulfilled, therefore he should stipulate for
the payment of the legacy. If, however, the heir Joes not give security, he
will be barred by an exception on the ground of bad faith; for it is to the
interest of the legatee to retain the amount in his hands rather than to be
placed in possession of the property of the estate.
(1) If a right of way is bequeathed to anyone, and the Falcidian Law being
applicable, he should bring an action to recover the entire right of way,
without tendering the appraised value of the fourth part of the same, Marcellus
says that he can be barred by an exception on the ground of bad faith, as the
heir must provide for his own interest.
(2) Where I gave a tract of land to anyone but did not deliver it, and the
person to whom I gave it without delivery of possession should build upon said
land with my knowledge, and after he has done so I should obtain possession,
and he should bring an action against me for what I have given him; and I
should interpose the exception that the donation exceeds the limit prescribed
by law, can a replication on the ground of bad faith be pleaded? This can be
done, for I acted in bad faith when I permitted him to build, and did not
reimburse him for his expenses.
(3) Where a slave has been appointed for the collection of money which is due,
any act of bad faith subsequently committed by him will prejudice his master.
(4) If a slave is sold by someone who was permitted by his master to dispose of
him, and he is then returned to his master, an exception based on his return
can be pleaded against the vendor, if he brings suit to recover the price of
the slave, even though he who sold him has paid the purchase money to his
master.
He also will be barred by an exception based on the non-delivery of merchandise
who has already paid the money to the owner of the same, and therefore, he who
sold the merchandise can bring an action against the owner.
Pedius says that the rule is the same where anyone who transacts our affairs
makes a sale.
(5) If I delegate to my creditor someone who intends to donate property to me
over and above the amount prescribed by law, he cannot make use of an exception
against the creditor, if the latter brings suit, because he only claims what he
is entitled to.
The same rule applies to a husband, for he should not be barred by an exception
who acts in his own name. Therefore, can it not also be said that an exception
on the ground of the fraud of a wife cannot be pleaded against her husband,
when he sues for her dowry, .as he would not have married the woman without a
dowry, unless a separation had already taken place? Hence the donor, or a woman
who has delegated, or released a debtor, is liable to a personal action brought
by the latter, either to obtain his release, or, if he has paid what was due,
in order that the money may be refunded to him.
(6) The case is not the same where an exception on the ground of fraud is
granted, as it is where a right of action is extinguished within a certain
time; for the exception is perpetual, as the plaintiff has the power to avail
himself of his privilege whenever he desires to do so, but the defendant can
only plead the exception after he has been sued.
6. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XXX.
If, through the agency of a creditor, his debtor should happen to lose the
money which he was about to pay him, the creditor will be barred by an
exception on the ground of fraud.
The same rule will apply when the creditor does not ratify the payment of money
by his debtor to his own creditor.
7. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXVI.
Julianus says that if I think that I owe you money, and by your order I promise
to pay it to someone to whom you wish to donate it, I can protect myself by an
exception on the ground of bad faith; and, in addition to this, I will be
entitled to an action against the stipulator to compel him to release me.
(1) Julianus also says that, if you think that a certain person is your
creditor, and by your direction I promise to pay him a sum of money which I
believe that I owe you, and he brings suit to recover it, he should be barred
by an exception on the ground of fraud; and further, if I institute proceedings
against the stipulator, I can compel
him to release me from the agreement. This opinion of Julianus is equitable, so
that I can make use of an exception, as well as bring a personal action against
the person to whom I obligated myself.
8. Paulus, On Plautius, Book VI.
He is guilty of fraud who demands something which he should return.
(1) If an heir has been charged not to collect anything from a debtor of the
estate, the latter can avail himself of an exception on the ground of fraud,
and can also bring suit under the terms of the will.
9. The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXII.
If the agent for a defendant suffers judgment to be rendered against him, after
the money has been paid, and proceedings to enforce the judgment have been
instituted against his principal, the latter can protect himself by pleading an
exception on the ground of fraud. Nor can he be compelled to give up what he
entrusted to his agent, for it is more just to permit money which has been
dishonorably obtained to remain in the hands of the person who was deceived
than under the control of him who was responsible for the deceit.
10. Marcianus, Rules, Book III.
When either a husband or a wife builds upon land which one of them has given to
the other, it is the opinion of several authorities that they can hold the
property by means of an exception on the ground of fraud.
11. Neratius, Parchments, Book IV.
Where an agent brings an action, an exception based on his bad faith should not
be interposed against him, because the suit is that of another, and he is a
stranger to it, and the bad faith of one person should not injure another. If
he commits a fraudulent act after issue has been joined, it may be doubted
whether an exception on this ground can be pleaded; because, by the trial of
the case, it becomes that of the agent, and he conducts it, to some extent, in
his own name. It has been decided that an exception can be pleaded on account
of fraud committed by the agent.
The same rule will apply to the case of a guardian who brings an action in the
name of his ward.
(1) In general, however, the following rule should be observed in matters of
this kind, that is to say, that fraud should always be punished, even if it
will not injure anyone but the person who committed it.
12. Papinianus, Questions, Book HI.
Where the justice of the defence affords means for the dismissal of an action,
the defendant can be protected by an exception on the ground of fraud.
13. Paulus, Questions, Book XIV.
When a will is broken, the rights of children who have been disinherited and
who have received nothing from their father's will should be preserved, and an
exception on the ground of bad faith cannot be pleaded against them. This not
only applies to them personally, but also to their heirs and descendants.
14. The Same, Opinions, Book HI.
Paulus gave it as his opinion that where a man builds a house upon the land of
another, he cannot recover the expenses he incurred unless he was in
possession, and the owner brings an action against him to recover the land, in
which case, he can oppose him by an exception on the ground of fraud.
15. Scsevola, Opinions, Book V.
A surety having had judgment rendered against him on account of eviction was
ready to return the land from which the purchaser was evicted, and everything
else which was included in the contract of sale. If the purchaser pleads the
exception based on res judicata,I ask whether he can be barred by one on the
ground of fraud. The answer was that the exception can be pleaded against him,
but that the judge will see that he satisfied the purchaser for all the damage
which the latter has sustained.
16. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book VI.
If a debtor delegated by an insane person whom he supposed to be of sound mind
should pay the creditor of the latter, and for this reason suit should be
brought against him, he can protect himself by an exception based on fraud, on
the ground that the insane person profited by the transaction.
17. Scsevola, Digest, Book XXVII.
A father promised a dowry for his daughter, and entered into an agreement that
he would support her and all her family. This foolish man made a note payable
to his son-in-law in lieu of the interest due on the promise to give a dowry.
As he had supported his daughter, and her husband had been at no expense on
this account, the question arose whether an exception on the ground of bad
faith could be pleaded in bar against the son-in-law, if he brought suit under
the stipulation for the purpose of collecting the note? The answer was, that if
her father had supported her, as was stated, and had made the promise by
mistake, then an exception on the ground of bad faith could be interposed.
(1) A grandfather bequeathed a-hundred sestercesto each one of his
grandchildren by his daughter, and added the following words, "I ask you to
pardon me, for I could have left you much more if your father Fronto had not
treated me badly, for I lent him fifteen aurei-which I could not collect, and
finally, the enemy deprived me of almost
all my property." If the heir of the grandfather should bring an action to
collect the fifteen aureifrom the said grandchildren, who were the heirs of
their father, the question arose, would he be considered to have acted against
the will of the deceased, and could he be barred by an exception on the ground
of fraud? The answer was that the exception would operate as a bar.
(2) An heir who was appointed to the fourth of an estate purchased for a
certain sum of money the share of his co-heir who had been appointed heir to
three-fourths of it, executed promissory notes for the deferred payments, and
bound himself by a stipulation. The vendor of the estate died; Septitius
attacked the will as being forged, and having brought suit to recover the
estate from the purchaser, obtained an order of court to prevent him from
disposing of any part of it. The question arose whether the heirs who brought
suit under the stipulation, while a case involving the genuineness of the will
was pending, could be barred by an exception on the ground of fraud. The answer
was that the heirs of the vendor could be barred by an exception on the ground
of fraud if they persisted in demanding payment of the notes before the case
relating to the will was decided.
(3) A woman, having appointed her husband and her son heirs to equal portions
of her estate, also appointed a daughter whom she had had by a former marriage
her heir, as follows: "Let my daughter, Ma?via, be the heir to six-twelfths of
my estate, if she accounts to her co-heirs for what I shall owe her at the time
of my death, growing out of the accounts of her guardianship, which my father,
Titius, her grandfather, administered." As this daughter had been appointed
under a condition, if she should reject the estate in order to preserve the
right of action on guardianship, the question arose whether she could claim the
legacy which had been bequeathed to her by her mother. The answer was that, in
accordance with the facts stated, she made the claim in question contrary to
the wishes of her mother, and therefore she would be barred by an exception on
the ground of bad faith.

TITLE V.
UNDER WHAT CIRCUMSTANCES AN ACTION SHALL NOT BE GRANTED.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXVI.
_ An oath taken in court has the same effect as a judgment, and this is not
unreasonable, as where a party tenders an oath to his adversary, he appoints
him judge in his own case.
(1) If a ward tenders an oath without the authority of his guardian, we hold
that this exception will not operate as a bar, unless it was tendered in court
by the authority of the guardian.
(2) If a litigant who claims a tract of land tenders the oath to his adversary,
and says that if the person from whom he obtained the land is willing to swear
that he delivered it to him, he will abandon
the case, an exception will be granted to the party in possession of the land.
(3) If a surety should make oath in court only with reference to himself
personally, that is to say, that he is not liable, this will be of no advantage
to the principal debtor; and if he should take the oath with reference to the
property, an exception will be granted to the principal debtor.
(4) If I manumit a slave who, while in servitude, was accustomed to transact my
business, and I afterwards stipulate with him for the payment of all that he
would have been obliged to pay me, if he had been free at the time when he
transacted my business, and I bring suit under the stipulation, I will not be
barred by an exception, for a freedman cannot complain that he is oppressed,
because he was not allowed to profit pecuniarily through the use of the
property of his patron.
. (5) If I make a stipulation for the purpose of placing restrictions on
freedom, I cannot enforce it against my freedman. Restrictions on freedom have
very properly been defined to be such as are imposed in such a way that if a
freedman should offend his patron, they can be exacted from him, so that he
remains continually under the apprehension that they will be required, and, on
account of this apprehension, he will submit to anything that his patron
demands.
(6) In a word, if some obligation is imposed upon a freedman, to take effect
the moment he obtains his liberty, it must be said that there will be ground
for an exception. If, however, this is done after an interval, the question
admits of doubt, for no one could force him to make such a promise. Still, in
this instance, the same conclusion must be arrived at if, after an
investigation has been made, it is apparent that the freedman subjected himself
to his patron in such a manner as to be rendered liable to a penalty under the
stipulation either through fear alone, or on account of excessive respect for
him.
(7) If a freedman should form a partnership with his patron in consideration of
obtaining his liberty, and his patron should bring an action on partnership
against him, will this exception be necessary? I think that the freedman will
be released from the exactions of his patron merely by operation of law.
(8) It must be remembered, that an exception allowed because of oppressive
conditions imposed on freedom, just like other exceptions, should not be
refused a surety, nor anyone who, at the request of a freedman, has rendered
himself liable; nor will it be denied to the freedman himself if he should be
appointed the attorney of the principal debtor in order to defend his case, or
if he should become his heir.
For, as the intention of the Prsetor, in obligations of this kind, is to assist
the principal debtor, his design would not be effected unless the freedman
should defend the surety, or him who had become liable at the request of the
freedman against his patron. For it makes little difference whether the
freedman is obliged to pay the patron directly, or to do so through the
intervention of the surety, or through someone who has become liable on his
account.
(9) Whether the promise has been made for the benefit of the patron himself, or
for that of another with the consent of the former, it will be considered to
have been made with the design of placing restrictions upon freedom, and
therefore there will be ground for this exception.
(10) If, however, a patron should delegate his freedman to his creditor, let us
see whether the former can avail himself of this exception against the creditor
to whom, having been delegated, he made a promise which had the effect of
placing restrictions upon his freedom. Cassius says it was the opinion of
Urseius that the creditor could, by no means, be barred by the exception,
because he only received what he was entitled to; but that the freedman could
recover from his patron what he had paid, if he had not done this for the
purpose of settling the controversy which had arisen with reference to his
manumission.
(11) Again, if a freedman should delegate his own debtor to his patron, the
latter cannot be barred by an exception, but the freedman can recover the
amount of the debt from his patron by means of a personal action.
(12) This exception should be granted not only to the freedman himself, but
also to his successors; and, on the other hand, it should be noted that the
heir of the patron can be barred if he attempts to collect the money.
2. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LXXI.
If the oath is tendered to a son under paternal control, and he swears that his
father does not owe anything, the exception should be granted to the father.
(1) If, where a game of chance is being conducted, I sell something in order
that I may play, and the property having been evicted, suit is brought against
me, the purchaser will be barred by an exception.
(2) If a slave promises a sum of money to his master in order that he may be
manumitted, and his master would not otherwise have manumitted him, and, having
become free, he renews his promise, it is held that his patron will not be
barred by an exception if he sues to recover the money, for this sum was not
promised for the purpose of placing restrictions upon freedom; otherwise it
would be unjust for the master to be deprived of the slave as well as of his
price. Therefore, money is promised for the purpose of imposing restrictions
upon freedom whenever a master voluntarily manumits his slave, and afterwards
wishes him to promise a sum of money, not with the intention of exacting it
from him, but in order that his freedmen may fear and obey him.

TITLE VI.
CONCERNING PROPERTY IN LITIGATION.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXVI.
When notice is served for the purpose of preventing a sale, this does not
render the property in question subject to litigation.
(1) Where the title to property is in controversy between two persons, and I
purchase it from a third, whose claim is not liable to dispute, let us see
whether there will be ground for an exception. I think that I will be entitled
to relief, because he who sold me the property was not engaged in any lawsuit,
and it might happen that two others had agreed with one another to dispute the
title to the property for the purpose of injuring him, as they could not
involve him in litigation. If, however, proceedings have been instituted
against the agent, guardian, or curator of anyone, it can be said that they
have been instituted against the principal, and therefore that he will be
entitled to an exception.
2. The Same, Trusts, Book VI.
If, when a slave purchased property, he knew that it was in litigation, but his
master was not aware of this, or vice versa,let us see whose knowledge of the
fact should be taken into account. The better opinion is that the knowledge of
him who purchased the property, and not that of him by whom it was acquired,
should be considered. Hence, the penalty attaching to the purchase of the
above-mentioned property, which is in litigation, can be collected, provided
the slave did not buy it under the direction of his master, for if he did so,
even if he knew that the title was in dispute, and his master was ignorant of
the fact, the knowledge of the slave will not prejudice him.
This was also stated by Julianus with reference to property in litigation.
3. Gaius, On the Law of the Twelve Tables, Book VI.
We forbid property which is in litigation to be dedicated to sacred purposes,
otherwise a double penalty will be incurred, and this is not unreasonable, as
in this way the condition of an adversary is prevented from becoming more
oppressive. It is, however, not 'stated whether the double penalty should be
paid to the Treasury, or to the adverse party. Perhaps it should be paid to the
latter, in order to console him for being delivered over to a more powerful
opponent.


TITLE VII. CONCERNING OBLIGATIONS AND ACTIONS.

1. Gaius, Golden Matters, Book II.
Obligations arise whether from contract, from crime, or from various other
causes by operation of law.
(1) Obligations arise from contracts either by words or by consent.
(2) In the case of a loan for consumption, the obligation is contracted with
reference to the property lent. Such a loan consists of articles which can be
weighed, counted, or measured; as, for instance, wine, oil, grain, and money;
we also lend things in such a way that their ownership vests in the person who
receives them with the expectation that other articles of the same kind and
quality will be given us in return.
(3) He to whom we lend anything for use is liable to us on account of the
transfer of the property, but he is also obliged to restore the very same thing
which he received.
(4) He, however, who has received a loan for consumption, still remains liable
if he loses what he receives by any accident whatsoever; but anyone who
receives an article for use is released from liability if he loses what he
received by an accident which human weakness could not provide against (as, for
example, by fire, by the falling of a building, or by shipwreck). He is,
nevertheless, held to the strictest diligence in taking care of the article
loaned; nor will it be sufficient if he loses what he received by an accident
which human weakness to his own property, provided another could have exercised
greater vigilance in its preservation.
He is also liable for occurrences which could not be prevented when it was his
fault that the property was lost; for instance, if anyone, having invited his
friends to supper, should borrow silverware for that purpose and then, having
gone on a journey and taken the silverware with him, should lose it, either by
shipwreck or by an attack of robbers or enemies.
(5) He, also, with whom we deposit property is liable to us for it, and is
obliged to return the same article which he himself received. If, however, he
should, through negligence, lose what was entrusted to his care, he will be
free from liability, as he did not receive it for his own benefit, but for that
of the person from whom he obtained it, and he will only be responsible if any
of it was lost through fraud. He, however, will not be liable on the ground of
negligence, who entrusted his property to a friend of his, who was careless,
for he has only himself to blame. Still, it has been decided that gross
negligence is included in the offence of fraud.
(6) A creditor who has received property in pledge is also liable on this
ground, and is obliged to return the very same article which he received.
(7) An obligation is verbally contracted by question and answer; as when we
stipulate that something shall be paid to or done for us.
(8) Anyone can be bound either in his own name or in that of another. Where a
person is bound in the name of another, he is called a surety, and we
frequently bind a man in his own name, and receive others from him who are
bound by the same obligation, in which way we provide for the better discharge
of an obligation which is contracted for our benefit.
(9) If we stipulate for something to be given to us, which is of such a nature
that this cannot be done, it is evident that such a stipulation is void by
natural law; as, for example, if an agreement is entered into for the delivery
of a freeman, or for that of a slave who is dead, or for a house which has been
burned, and this is done between parties who did not know that the man in
question was not free, or that the slave was dead, or that the house had been
destroyed by fire.
The "rule is the same if anyone should stipulate for the transfer of a sacred
or religious place to himself.
(10) A stipulation is also void if a person contracts for property which
belongs to himself, not knowing that this is the case.
(11) It is also established that a stipulation made under an impossible
condition is void.
(12) It is clear, by natural law, that the act of an insane person who makes
either a stipulation or a promise is of no effect.
(13) He resembles a child who is of such a tender age that he does not yet
comprehend what he is doing. The law, however, is more indulgent to him, for
anyone who can speak is believed to be capable of making a valid stipulation or
promise.
(14) It is perfectly clear that a mute cannot contract a verbal obligation.
(15) The same rule also applies to a person who is deaf, for, if he can speak
or promise, he should hear the words of the stipulator; but if he stipulates,
he should hear the words of the promisor. Hence it is apparent that we are not
speaking of one who hears with difficulty, but of one who does not hear at all.

2. The Same, Institutes, Book III.
Obligations are contracted by consent in the case of purchases, sales, hirings,
leases, partnerships, and mandates.
(1) We say that obligations are contracted by consent in these ways, because
formality of words or writing is not essential; but it is sufficient for those
who transact the business to consent.
(2) Hence such obligations may be contracted between parties who are absent,
as, for instance, by letter or by messenger.
(3) Moreover, in contracts of this description each of the parties is bound to
the others for whatever should be done, consistent with justice and good faith.

3. Paulus, Institutes, Book II.
The nature of obligations does not consist in the fact that they render some
property or some servitude ours, but that they require us to give something, to
do something, or to be responsible for something.
(1) In the case of a loan in order for the obligation to be contracted it is
not sufficient for the money merely to be given and received, but it must be
given and received with the understanding that this will be the case.
Therefore, if anyone gives his money to me as a donation, although it belongs
to the donor, and passes into my hands, still I am not liable to him for it,
because this was not our intention.
(2) A verbal obligation is also contracted, if this was the intention of the
parties; for instance, if I should say to you by way of jest, or for the
purpose of explaining what a stipulation is, "Do you promise me So-and-So?" and
you answer, "I do promise," an obligation will not arise.

4. Gaius, Diurnal or Golden Matters, Book HI.Obligations also arise from
criminal acts, for example, from theft, damage, robbery, injuries, all of which
offences are of the same kind,
for they are all derived from the matter itself, that is to say from the
offence; while, on the other hand, obligations arising from contract are not
only derived from the transfer of the property, but also from the words and the
consent of the parties.

5. The Same, Golden Matters, Book III.
Where anyone who transacts the business of an absent person performs some act
by virtue of a mandate, it is evident that, from the contract which is made,
actions on mandate will lie between the parties, in which each of them can
prove how one should act toward the other in compliance with the rules of good
faith. If, however, the agent acts without a mandate, it has been decided that
the parties will be mutually liable; and, on this account, proceedings have
been introduced which we designate actions based on voluntary agency, by means
of which we can compel one another to do whatever justice and good faith
demand.
Actions of this kind, however, do not arise either from contracts or from
crimes, for he who transacts the business of another during his absence is
believed to have made an agreement with him previously ; and it is no breach of
the law to undertake to transact the business of another without a mandate.
Thus, it can still be said that he whose business has been transacted without
his knowledge has either made a contract or committed a criminal offence; but
through motives of convenience it has been established that the parties are
liable to one another.
This rule has been adopted for the reason that men frequently depart for
foreign countries with the intention of speedily returning, and, on this
account, do not commit the care of their business to anyone; and afterwards,
through the occurrence of unforeseen events, they are necessarily absent for a
longer time than they expected to be, and it is unjust that their business
should suffer which would, indeed, happen if the person who offered to attend
to their affairs should not be entitled to an action to recover any expense
which he had properly paid out of his own purse; or if he whose affairs had
been transacted should have no right of action against him who took charge of
his business without authority.
(1) Those who are liable to an action on guardianship are not, properly
speaking, considered to be bound on account of contracts, as no agreement is
entered into between guardian and ward. But, for the reason that they cannot be
held responsible on account of a criminal offence, they are considered to be
liable under a quasi contract. In this case, also, the actions are reciprocal.
For not only can the ward bring suit against his guardian, but, on the other
hand, the guardian is entitled to an action against his ward, if he has
expended anything upon the property of the latter, or becomes responsible for
him, or encumbered his own property to one of his creditors.
(2) An heir who owes a legacy is not understood to be liable either on account
of a contract or a crime, for a legatee is not understood to have made any
contract with the deceased, or with his heir,
and it is perfectly clear that no criminal offence has been committed in a case
of this kind.
(3) He, also, who, through the mistake of the person who made the payment,
received something to which he was not entitled, is bound as in the case of a
loan, and is liable to the same action as that to which a debtor is liable to
his creditor. It should not, however, be understood that he who is responsible
in a case of this kind is bound by a contract; for anyone who pays money by a
mistake does so rather with the intention of discharging an obligation than of
contracting one.
(4) If a judge should render an improper decision, he is not, strictly
speaking, considered to be liable on account of a crime, nor is he bound by
virtue of a contract; still, as he has committed a fault, even if this was done
through ignorance, he is considered to be liable on account of a quasi offence.
(5) He, also, is considered to be liable on account of a quasi offence, if,
from an apartment which belongs to him, or which he has leased, or occupies
gratuitously, he throws down, or pours out anything so that it injures a
passer-by. Hence, he cannot properly be understood to be liable on account of
having committed an offence, because very frequently he is responsible for the
carelessness of another, for instance, for that of a slave, or a child. He
resembles one who places or hangs something in a part of the house under which
people are accustomed to pass, and which may injure someone, if it should fall.
Therefore, if a son under paternal control, who lives separately from his
father, should throw down or pour out anything from his apartment, or should
place or hang anything above the street which threatens injury to the passers-
by, it is the opinion of Julianus that an action should be granted against the
son himself, and that neither an action De peculianor a noxal action should be
granted against the father.
(6) Likewise, the master of a ship, or the proprietor of a tavern or an inn, is
held to be responsible for a quasi criminal offence for any damage or theft
which may be committed on board the ship, or in the tavern or inn, provided he
does not himself commit the offence, but someone does whom he employs on the
ship, or in the tavern or inn; for as this action cannot be brought against him
on account of a contract, and as he is, to a certain extent, guilty of
neglfgence for making use of the services of bad men, he is considered to be
liable on account of the quasi criminal offence.

6. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IV.
In all temporary actions, my liability is not ended until the last day "has
entirely expired.

7. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XV.
Actions cannot be granted to a son against his father as long as he remains
under his control.

8. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XVI.
An obligation contracted under the following condition, "If I wish," is void;
for when you cannot be compelled to give anything unless you desire to do so,
it is just as if nothing had been said. The heir of anyone who makes a promise,
and who never expects to perform it, is not liable, because this condition has
never been complied with, so far as the promisor himself is concerned.

9. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IX.
A son under paternal control is not entitled to an action in his own name,
except for the reparation of injury sustained, and where he has been deprived
of property by violence' or clandestinely, or to recover property which he has
deposited or lent; which is the opinion of Julianus.

10. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XLVII.
Natural obligations should not be considered merely because no action can be
brought on account of them, but also for the reason that where money has been
paid which was not due it cannot be recovered.

11. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XII.
Whatever acts we perform which derive their origin from our contracts are void,
unless the beginning of the obligation is ours personally ; and hence we can
neither stipulate, purchase, sell, or contract in such a way that another can
properly bring an action on this ground in his own name.

12. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XXIX.
An heir is liable in full where fraud has been committed by the deceased in
contracts of deposit, loan for use, mandate, guardianship, and voluntary
agency.

13. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book I.
Actions in factumcan even be brought by a son who is under paternal control.

14. The Same, Disputations, Book VII.
Slaves are responsible for their crimes, and remain so even after their
manumission; they are not, however, civilly liable for their contracts, still,
they are bound, and they bind others in accordance with natural law. Finally, I
shall be released from liability if, after a slave has been manumitted, I pay
him a sum of money which he has lent me.

15. Julianus, Digest, Book IV.
A certain man who brought an action against an heir was barred by an exception
on the ground that the will was about to be set aside for the reason that
possession of the estate could be granted to an emancipated son. The said
emancipated son having failed to demand possession of the estate, the creditor
could very properly ask that his
right of action against the appointed heir should be restored to him,, for as
long as the possession of the estate could be granted to the son contrary to
the provisions of the will, the heir, to a certain extent, was not a debtor.

16. The Same, Digest, Book XIII.
A man borrowed a sum of money from a slave forming part of an estate, and gave
him by way of pledge a tract of land or a slave, and having requested that the
land or the slave be retained by him under a precarious title, he kept
possession of it under such a title. He did this because a slave belonging to
an estate acquired property for it by accepting delivery of the same; and by
granting property under a precarious title, the result is that it cannot be
acquired by usucaption. For if he had lent the property for use, or deposited
it, and it had formed part of his peculium,he would have the right to bring an
action on loan or deposit for the benefit of the estate. This occurs where the
contract was made with reference to his peculium,for it should be understood
that possession of property is acquired under such circumstances.

17. The Same, Digest, Book XLVII.
All debtors who owe property for a valid consideration are released where the
property comes into the hands of creditors in some other way from which they
obtain pecuniary benefit.

18. The Same, Digest, Book LIV.
If anyone, who has stipulated to give Stichus, becomes the heir of a person who
is entitled to the said Stichus under the terms of a will, and he brings suit
under the will to recover Stichus, he does not annul the stipulation. On the
other Rand, if he brings an action to recover Stichus under the stipulation, he
will still be entitled to one under the will; because in the beginning, these
two obligations were contracted in such a way that if one of them was brought
into court, the other would, nevertheless, remain unimpaired.

19. The Same, Digest, Book LXXIII.
A lucrative title is not considered to arise from the promise of a dowry, for
the reason that he who claims the dowry is understood to be, to a certain
extent, a creditor or a purchaser. However, when a creditor or a purchaser
obtains property by some lucrative title, he still retains the right to the
action to recover it;, just as, on the other hand, a person who does not obtain
the property by a lucrative title is not prevented from bringing an action to
recover it on this account.

20. Alfenus, Digest, Book II.
A slave should not, under all circumstances, go unpunished, where he has
listened to the commands of his master; for instance, when the latter has
ordered him to kill someone, or to commit a theft. Wherefore, although a slave
may commit piracy by order of his master, he
^should be prosecuted for doing so after he has obtained his freedom; and any
act of violence which he may have committed, which is criminal, will render him
liable to punishment.
If, however, a quarrel arose on account of a controversy or a dispute, or force
was employed for the purpose of maintaining a right to which his master was
entitled, and no crime was perpetrated, then the Prsetor should not grant an
action on this ground against a freedman, who, when a slave, had obeyed the
commands of his master.

21. Julianus, On Minicius, Book V.
Everyone is considered to have made a contract in the place where he bound
himself to pay.

22. Africanus, Questions, Book III.
When anyone stipulates for merchandise, and accepts a surety to be furnished on
a certain day, the time must be computed from the day when he received the
security.

23. The Same, Questions, Book VII.
A stipulation was entered into with reference to money to be employed in
commerce, and as is customary, a penalty was inserted therein for the purpose
of indemnifying the person who furnished the money, if it should not be paid by
the specified time. The latter demanded the money, and a part of it having been
paid, he neglected to demand the remainder then, but, after the lapse of some
time, he did demand it. A jurist, having been consulted, gave it as his opinion
that the penalty could be collected for the time during which the debtor had
not been notified to pay, and that this could even be done if he had not been
notified at all; and that the stipulation would become inoperative only where
the debtor was responsible for payment not having been made.
Otherwise, it must be said that, if he who had begun to push the claim should
cease to do so because he was prevented by illness, the penalty would not
attach. Hence, a doubt may arise, if the debtor, having been notified to pay,
should himself be in default, whether the penalty would not attach, even though
he afterwards tendered the money. This may be said to be more equitable, for if
an arbiter appointed to arrange a settlement should order the money to be paid
by a certain time, and he whom he ordered to pay it is not in default, it is
held that the penalty will not attach; and therefore, Servius very properly
held, if the day when the money was to be paid was not included in the decision
of the arbiter, a reasonable time should be held to have been granted.
The same rule will apply where anything has been sold under the condition that,
unless the price is paid by a certain time, the transaction will be void.

24. Pomponius, Rules.
If I" borrow a sum of money from an insane person, believing that he is of
sound mind, and I employ that money for my own benefit, the
insane person will be entitled to an action to recover it. For, as rights of
action are acquired by us under certain circumstances, when we are not aware of
the fact, so, under similar circumstances, actions can be brought in the name
of insane persons; for example, if the slave of such a person enters into a
stipulation, or property is stolen from him, or he is injured in such a way
that suit can be brought under the Aquilian Law; or if he is a creditor, ;(and
his debtor should convey property to someone with the intention of defrauding
him.
The same rule is applicable where a legacy is bequeathed to an insane person,
or property is left to him under the terms of a trust.
(1) Likewise, if anyone who has lent money to the slave of another afterwards
becomes insane, and the slave employs the borrowed money for his master's
benefit, the insane person will be entitled to an action to recover it.
(2) Again, if anyone who has lent money belonging to another should afterwards
become insane, and the money be expended, an action to recover it will be
acquired by the insane person.
(3) Anyone who transacts the business of an insane person is liable to him in
an action on the ground of voluntary agency.

25. Ulpianus, Rules, Book V.
There are two kinds of actions, one a real one, which is styled vindictio,and
the other a personal one, which is called condictio.The real action is that by
which we sue for property belonging to us which is in the possession of
another, and it is always brought against the party in possession. The personal
action is one which we bring against a person who is bound to do something for,
or give something to us, and it is always against him that it is brought.
(1) Some actions are based on contract, others on an act, and others still are
in factum.An action is founded upon a contract whenever one person has entered
into an agreement with another for his own advantage; as, for instance, by a
purchase, a sale, a hiring, a lease, and other transactions of this kind. An
action based on an act is where anyone is liable for some offence which he
himself has committed; for instance, a theft or an injury, or for some damage
which he has caused. An action in factumis, for example, one which is granted
to a patron against his freedman, by whom he has been brought into court in
violation of the Praetorian Edict.
(2) All actions are said to be either civil or praetorian.

26. The Same, On Taxes, Book V.
All penal actions pass to heirs, after judicial proceedings have been
instituted.

27. Papinianus, Questions, Book XXVII.
Obligations which are not valid themselves cannot be rendered so either by the
decision of the judge, the order of the Prsetor, or the power of the law.

28. The Same, Definitions, Book I.
The claim made against a person is designated an "action;" one made against a
thing is called a "petition," the term "pursuit," instituted for the purpose of
recovering the property, is employed both against things and persons.

29. Paulus, Opinions, Book IV.
Acertain sum of money was due to Lucius Titius under a judgment. He lent the
same debtor another sum of money, and in taking security for its payment, he
did not mention that the amount due under the judgment should also be given to
him. I ask whether Lucius Titius is entitled to both actions. Paulus answered
that there is nothing in the case stated why both rights of action should not
remain unimpaired.

30. Scaevola, Opinions, Book I.
Where a man has been reduced to slavery, and afterwards obtains his freedom
through the indulgence of the Emperor, he cannot, for this reason, be said to
assume his obligations to his creditors.

31. Msecianus, Trusts, Book II.
Not only stipulations, but also any other contracts which have been made under
impossible conditions are considered to be of no force or effect; as, for
instance, sales or leases, where they are dependent upon impossible events, are
also void; because when an agreement is made between two or more persons the
intention of all of them is taken in account, and there is no doubt that they
think a contract of this kind cannot be executed, if a condition is imposed
which they know to be impossible.

32. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book II.
When several actions arise from one single crime, as happens when trees are
said to be cut down by stealth, it was established, after many differences of
opinion, that proceedings could be instituted against all the parties.
33. Paulus, Decrees, Book III.
While it has been set forth in certain Imperial Constitutions that heirs,
generally speaking, are not liable to a penalty, it has, nevertheless, been
decided that if the deceased had been sued during his lifetime, his heirs will
be subject to the penalty, on the principle that issue had been joined with the
deceased.

34. The Same, On Concurrent Actions.
Anyone who strikes the slave of another in such a way as to injure him becomes
liable by his act to a suit under the Aquilian Law, as well as to one for the
reparation of damage, for injury is intentionally-committed, and damage is
caused by negligence; therefore both actions will lie. There are, however,
certain authorities who
hold that when one of these actions is chosen, the other is lost; and others
are of the opinion that if the action under the Aquilian Law is selected, the
one for the reparation of damage will be lost; since it ceases to be proper and
equitable for judgment to be rendered against him who has paid the amount of
damages appraised.
If, however, the action for reparation of damage has already been brought, the
party will still be liable under the Aquilian Law.
This opinion should be restricted by the Praetor, unless suit is brought for
the excess that can be obtained under the Aquilian Law. Hence it is more
reasonable to admit that the plaintiff can make his choice of the actions, and
afterwards employ the other to collect anything more than he can obtain by the
first one.
(1) If anyone steals an article which I have lent to him for his own use, he
will be liable both to an action on loan, and to a personal action to recover
the property, but either one of these proceedings annuls the other, either by
operation of law, or by the pleading of an exception; which is the better
opinion.
(2) Hence it was held with reference to the tenant who had stolen something
belonging to the land, that he was liable both to an action for the recovery of
the property, to one for theft, and to one on the lease. The penalty of theft
is not merged, but the other two actions are. This is applicable to the
proceeding under the Aquilian Law; for if I lend you clothing, and you tear it,
both actions will lie to recover the property. After suit under the Aquilian
Law has been brought, the right to sue on the loan is extinguished; and after
the action on the loan is instituted, there is some doubt as to whether the one
under the Aquilian Law cannot be brought within thirty days, for the reason
that it is more advantageous.
The better opinion is, that the right to bring it is retained, because it adds
to the simple value of the property, and if the simple value has been paid,
there will be no ground for bringing it.

35. The Same, On the Principal Edict, Book I.
With reference to Praetorian actions, Cassius says that it must be held that
such as permit the pursuit of the property may be granted after a year has
expired, and the others within the year. Praetorian actions, however, which are
not granted after the year has elapsed, are not available against an heir;
still, any profit which he has acquired may be exacted from him, just as
happens in an action on the ground of fraud, in the interdict Unde vi,and in
other proceedings of this description. These include the pursuit of the
property, by which we endeavor to recover anything which has been taken from
our patrimony, and when we proceed against the possessor of the estate of our
debtor. The Publician Action, which is granted for the purpose of recovering
property, is also the same kind. Where, however, this action is granted on the
ground that usucaption has been interrupted, the right is extinguished within a
year, because it is granted contrary to the principles of the Civil Law.
(1) An action on a contract made by municipal magistrates is granted against
the duumvirs and the municipality after a year has elapsed.

36. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book II.
In personal suits for the recovery of property, a judgment does not always
imply disgrace, even though it may be rendered in cases involving infamy.

37. The Same, On the Edict of the Prsetor, Book IV.
In the term "action" are included real, personal, direct, equitable, and
prejudicial actions, as Pomponius says, and also Praetorian stipulations,
because they take the place of actions, as well as proceedings to provide
against threatened injury, to insure the payment of legacies, and others of
this kind. Interdicts are also embraced in the term "action."
(1) Mixed actions are those in which both parties are plaintiffs; as, for
example, such as are instituted for the settlement of boundaries, suits in
partition, and for the division of property owned in common, and the interdicts
Uti possidetisand Utrubi.

38. Paulus, On the Edict, Book III.
We are not bound by the form of the letters, but by the meaning which they
express, as it has been decided that writing shall not have less validity than
what is meant by words uttered by the tongue.

39. Gaius, On the Edict, Book HI.
A son under paternal control, like the head of a household, is bound by all
kinds of titles, and suit can be brought against him on this ground, just as
can be done against a person who is independent.

40. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XI.
Legacies are considered as claims against an estate, although they begin to be
payable by the heir.

41. The Same, On the Edict, Book XXII.
Whenever the law introduces an obligation, unless it is especially provided
that we shall only make use of one action, even ancient actions will lie for
this purpose.
(1) If two actions for the same cause can be brought, and the plaintiff could
have recovered a larger sum by making use of the other, which he did not bring,
it will be the duty of the court to render a decision in his favor for that
amount; but if he could only have recovered the same sum, or less, the second
action will be of no advantage to him.

42. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXI.
A person, to whom a legacy was bequeathed under a condition is not a creditor
of the estate while the condition is pending, but only
after it has been fulfilled; although it is established that anyone who
stipulated under a condition remains a creditor while that condition is in
abeyance.
(1) We should understand creditors to be those who are entitled to a civil
action (provided they cannot be barred by an exception), or a praetorian
action, or an action in factum.

43. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LXXII.
The head of a household that has arrived at the age of puberty, who is his own
master, and of sound mind, can obligate himself. A ward cannot become liable
under the Civil Law without the authority of his guardian. A slave cannot be
bound by a contract.

44. The Same, On the Edict of the Prsetor, Book LXXIV.
There are four different kinds of obligations, for they are contracted with
reference to a certain time, or under a certain condition, or with reference to
a certain measure, or dependent upon certain results.
(1) There are two things to be taken into consideration with reference to time,
for the obligation either begins or terminates at a certain date. It begins at
a certain date, for instance, as follows, "Do you promise to pay me such-and-
such a sum on the Kalendsof March?" The nature of this obligation is that the
amount cannot be collected before the specified time. When it is made within a
certain time, for example, as follows, "Do you promise to pay me between now
and the Kalendsof March?" it is established that neither an obligation nor a
legacy can be contracted for a time, since when anything begins to be due to
another, it ceases to be due under certain circumstances.
It is clear that a stipulator can be barred by an exception on the ground of
his agreement, or on account of fraud, after the time has expired. Likewise, if
anyone, while delivering a tract of land, should say that he conveys the soil
without the building upon it, this will not prevent the building, which by
nature is attached to the soil, from passing with it.
(2) A condition is effectual which was inserted in the obligation at the time
when it was contracted, and not after it had been perfected; as, for instance,
"Do you promise to pay me a hundred aureiif a ship does not arrive from Asia?"
In this case, however, if the condition should be fulfilled, there would be
ground for an exception based on an informal agreement, or on fraud.
(3) The measure of an obligation becomes apparent when we stipulate for ten
aureior a slave, as the delivery of either one of these disposes of the entire
contract, and one of them cannot be demanded as long as both are in existence.
(4) The result of an obligation has reference to either a person or a thing; to
a person where I stipulate that payment shall be made . either to me or to
Titius; to a thing where I stipulate than ten aureishall be paid to me, or a
slave shall be delivered to Titius; and, in
this instance, the question arises whether, when the slave is delivered to
Titius, he becomes free by operation of law.
(5) When I stipulate as follows, "If you do not give me such-and-such a tract
of land, do you promise to pay me a hundred aurei ?"only the sum of a hundred
aureiis the object of the stipulation, but the transfer of the land is one way
of discharging the obligation.
(6) If I stipulate for the building of a ship, and if you do not build it that
you should pay me a hundred aurei,let us see whether or not there are two
stipulations, one absolute, and the other conditional; and if the condition of
the second one is fulfilled, whether it will not annul the first; or whether it
will not incorporate it into itself, and become, as it were, a renewal of the
first. The last is the better opinion.

45. The Same, On Plautius, Book HI.
When a man, who owes Stichus under a stipulation, manumits him before being in
default, and the slave dies before the promisor is sued for not delivering him,
the latter will not be liable. For he is not considered to be to blame because
he did not deliver the slave.

46. The Same, On Plautius, Book VII.
An insane person and a ward are liable without the authority of their curator
or guardian, where the obligation arises from the property itself; as, for
instance, if I hold a tract of land in common with one of them, and have
incurred some expense with reference to it, or the ward has damaged it in some
way, he will be liable to an action in partition.

47. The Same, On Plautius, Book XIV.
Arianus says that there is a great deal of difference between the question
whether anyone is liable or has been released. When inquiry is made with
reference to the existence of liability, we should be more inclined to deny
that this is the case, if we have any occasion to do so. When, on the other
hand, the question is with reference to being released, the tendency should be
in favor of it.

48. The Same, On Plautius, Book XVI.
In any transactions in which speech is not necessary, consent will be
sufficient; and in matters of this kind a deaf person can take part, for the
reason that he can understand and give his consent, as in hiring, leases,
purchases, and other similar contracts.

49. The Same, On Plautius, Book XVIII.
Actions arising from contracts are granted against heirs, even where some crime
is involved; as, for example, where a guardian has been guilty of bad faith in
administering his trust, or where someone with whom property was deposited has
committed fraud. In this, instance, even if a son under paternal control or a
slave has committed a fraudulent act of this kind, an action De peculio,and not
a noxal action, will be granted.

50. Pomponius, On Plautius, Book VII.
When anyone promises to pay a sum of money within a year, or has judgment
rendered against him requiring him to do so, he can pay it on any day during
the year.

51. Celsus, Digest, Book III.
An action is nothing else but the right to recover what we are entitled to by
means of a judicial proceeding.

52. Modestinus, Rules, Book II.
We contract an obligation either with reference to the property itself, or by
words, or by both of these at the same time, or by consent, or by the Common
Law, or by praetorian law, or by necessity, or by a criminal offence.
(1) We contract an obligation on account of the property, when it is delivered
to us.
(2) We contract one by words, where a question is asked, and a proper answer is
given.
(3) We contract an obligation on account of the property and by words, where
the property is delivered, and answers to questions are given at the same time.
(4) When we consent to anything, we are necessarily liable on account of our
voluntary acquiescence.
(5) We contract an obligation by the Common Law, when we obey the laws in
accordance with what they prescribe, or we violate them.
(6) We contract an obligation by praetorian law when something is ordered to be
done or prohibited by the Perpetual Edict, or by the magistrate.
(7) Those contract an obligation by necessity who cannot do anything else than
what they are directed to do. This happens in the case of a necessary heir,
(8) We contract an obligation on account of a criminal offence, where the
principal part of the inquiry has reference to the illegal act committed.
(9) Even simple consent will be sufficient to establish an obligation, although
it may be expressed by words.
(10) Many obligations are contracted merely by signs of assent.

53. The Same, Rules, Book HI.
Several offences committed with reference to one and the same thing give rise
to different actions; but it is established that all of them cannot be
employed, and if several causes of action arise from one obligation, one alone,
and not all, should be made use of.
(1) When we make the general statement in an obligation, "Or for the benefit of
him to whom the property shall belong," we include not only persons who have
been arrogated, but also others who may succeed to us by any other right.

54. The Same, Rules, Book V.
Fictitious contracts are not legally binding, even in the case of sales, for
the reason that they are only simulated, and are not based on truth.

55. Javolenus, Epistles, Book XII.
In all matters having reference to the transfer of ownership, the concurrence
and the intention of both contracting parties must exist; for in sales,
donations, leases, or any other kind of contracts, unless both parties agree,
anything which has been begun will have no effect.

56. Pomponius, On Quintus Mucius, Book XX.
Any actions to which I may be entitled through the agency of my slave, whether
they are derived from the Law of the Twelve Tables, or from the Aquilian Law,
or can be brought on account of injury or theft committed, will continue to
exist, even if the slave should afterwards be either manumitted or alienated,
or should die.
A personal action for the recovery of property which has been stolen by the
said slave will also lie, unless I, having obtained possession of him, should
either alienate or manumit him.

57. The Same, On Quintus Mucius, Book XXXVI.
In all agreements which have been made, whether they were entered into in good
faith or not, if any mistake has arisen through a misunderstanding of the
parties, that is, if he who purchased or leased the property differed in
opinion from him with whom he made the contract, the transaction will be void.
The same rule should be adopted in the formation of a partnership, so that if
the partners think differently, one holding one opinion and the other another,
the partnership will not be valid, as it depends upon the consent of the
parties.

58. Callistratus, The Minority Edict, Book I.
It must be remembered that where issue has been joined in a case, it passes
against the heir and other persons of this kind.

59. Licinius Rufinus, Rules, Book Vill.
A ward, through borrowing money, does not render himself liable by natural law.

60. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVII.
Where penal actions relating to the same sum of money are concurrent, one of
them never annuls the other.

61. Scsevola, Digest, Book XXVIII.
The agent of Seius sent a note to a goldsmith, at the bottom of which were the
following words: "I, Lucius Kalendius, have approved
what was written above, and a balance of so much is due from us to So-and-So."
I ask whether this would bind Gaius Seius? The answer was that if Seius was not
otherwise bound, he would not be liable for what was stated in this document.
(1) Seia, desiring to pay a salary to Lucius Titius, sent him the following
letter: "To Lucius Titius, Greeting. If you are of the same mind, and entertain
the affection for me which you have always done, sell your property and come to
me as soon as you receive this letter. I will pay you ten aureievery year, as
long as I live, for I know how much you love me." If Lucius Titius should sell
his property and go to her, I ask whether the annual salary mentioned in the
letter could be collected by him. The answer was, that an investigation must be
made with reference to the rank of the persons, and their motives, in order to
determine whether an action should be granted.
