# -*- mode: org -*-

THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS. BOOK XIX.


BOOK XIX.
TITLE I. CONCERNING THE ACTIONS OF PURCHASE AND SALE .................. 53
TITLE II. CONCERNING LEASING AND HIRING ................................. 78
TITLE III.
CONCERNING THE ACTION FOR THE ESTIMATION OF THE VALUE OF PROPERTY
................................................... 102
TITLE IV. CONCERNING THE EXCHANGE OF PROPERTY .......................... 104
TITLE V. CONCERNING ACTIONS PRAESCRIPTIS VERBIS, AND IN FACTUM.......... 107



TITLE I. CONCERNING THE ACTIONS OF PURCHASE AND SALE.

1. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXVIII.
If the property sold is not delivered, the purchaser will be entitled to an
action to recover the amount of his interest in having this done. This interest
sometimes is greater than the price of the property itself, where it is worth
more to the buyer than the value of the property, or what it was purchased
with.
(1) If the vendor knew that the property was subject to a servitude, and
concealed the fact, he cannot avoid an action on purchase, provided the buyer
was ignorant that this was the case; for everything which is done in violation
of good faith is included in an action on purchase. We understand the vendor to
be aware of the encumbrance, and to conceal it, not only where he does not
notify the purchaser, but also where he denies that the said servitude is due,
when questioned on the subject. If you suggest, as an instance, that the vendor
said: "No servitude is due, but in case one should unexpectedly appear, I will
not be liable," I think that he will be liable to an action on purchase,
because the servitude was owing, and he knew it. If, however, the vendor took
measures to prevent the purchaser from ascertaining that a servitude was due, I
hold that he will be liable to an action on purchase.
And, generally speaking, I should say that, if he acted fraudulently in
concealing the existence of the servitude, he should be held liable, but not
after he has consented to furnish the security. These principles are correct,
when the purchaser did not know that the servitudes existed, because he is not
considered to have concealed anything where the other party is aware of it, nor
should he be informed who is not ignorant of the facts.
2. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book V.
Where the dimensions of a tract of land are mentioned at the time of the sale,
and the amount is not delivered, an action on purchase will lie.
Full possession of property is not understood to be transferred to a purchaser,
if any legatee or trustee appointed for its preservation is in possession of
the same, or any creditors hold it. The same must be said where an unborn child
is in possession, for the term full possession also applies to this case.
3. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book IX.
The delivery of possession which should be made by the vendor is of such a
nature that if anyone can legally deprive the purchaser of it, possession will
not be understood to have been delivered.
(1) Where the purchaser stipulates for full delivery of possession, and brings
an action on the stipulation, the profits will not be included in said action;
because when anyone stipulates for the delivery of land, it is understood that
full possession of the same must be delivered, and the delivery of the crops is
not embraced in such a stipulation, as nothing more should be included in it
than the mere transfer of the land; but an action on purchase for the delivery
of the crops will lie.
(2) If I purchase a pathway, a driveway for cattle, a general right of way, or
the right to conduct water through your premises, there is no delivery of mere
possession; and therefore you should furnish me security that nothing will be
done by you to prevent the exercise of my right.
(3) When a vendor of wine is in default with reference to its delivery, he
should be condemned to pay the highest price for said wine, either at the time
of the sale, or when the damages were assessed in court, and also its greatest
value either at the place where the sale was made, or where the suit was
brought.
(4) When the purchaser is responsible for the default, the value of the wine
must be estimated at the time when the action was brought, and with reference
to the lowest price of the same at the place where this was done. Default is
said to occur where the vendor is prevented by no difficulty from delivering
the wine, especially if he has always been ready to deliver it. Moreover, it is
not necessary to consider the price of the wine at the place where suit is
brought, but where the wine is to be delivered, for if wine is sold at
Brindisi, even though the contract may have been made elsewhere, it must be
delivered at Brindisi.
4. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book V.
If you sell me a slave, being aware that he is a thief or has committed some
damage, and I am ignorant of the fact, even though you may have promised me
double damages, you will be liable to me in an action on purchase to the amount
of what my interest would have been in knowing the character of the slave;
because I cannot bring an action against you on the ground of the stipulation,
before I myself have actually lost something.
(1) Where the measurement of a field is found to be less than had been stated,
the vendor will be liable for the amount of the deficiency; because where the
measurement falls short, the quality of ground which does not exist cannot be
ascertained. And not only will the purchaser be entitled to an action where the
measurement of a field falls short in its entirety, but also with reference to
any portion of the same; as, for instance, if it were stated that there are so
many jugera in a vineyard, or an olive-orchard, and the amount is found to be
less. Therefore, in these instances, an estimate should be made with reference
to the good quality of the soil.
5. The Same, On Sabinus, Book V.
When an heir is charged by will to sell property belonging to the estate, and
he does so, an action can be brought against him either on
sale or on account of the will, for all the accessories belonging to the
property purchased.
(1) Where, however, he, erroneously believing that he is charged with the sale
of the property, sells it; it must be held that an action on sale cannot be
brought against him, since he can be barred by an exception on the ground of
fraudulent intent; just as if he, laboring under a mistake, having promised
that he will deliver property subject to such a charge, can bar the other party
if he brings an action, by pleading an exception based on fraudulent intent.
Pomponius even holds that he can bring an action for an indeterminate amount,
in order to obtain his release.
6. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book IX.
A vendor will be liable to an action on sale, even if he was not aware that the
measurement of the field was less than had been represented.
(1) If I should sell you a house for a certain amount, under the condition that
you will repair another house belonging to me, I can bring an action on sale to
compel you to repair it. If, however, it had only been agreed upon that you
should repair said house, a purchase and sale, as Neratius says, is not held to
have been made.
(2) Moreover, if I sold you a vacant lot for a certain price, and delivered it,
on the condition that after you had built a house you will re-convey half of
the same to me; it is certain that I am entitled to an action on sale to compel
you to build, and also to make the transfer to me after the building has been
completed; for so long as any condition relative to the property sold is not
complied with by you, it is established that I am entitled to an action on
sale.
(3) If you purchase ground for a burial-place, and a house is built by the
vendor near said place, before any interment is made there, you can have
recourse to an action against him.
(4) If you sell me a vessel of any kind, and state that it is of a certain
capacity, or of a certain weight, if it is deficient in either respect, I can
bring an action on sale against you. But if you sell a vase to me, and
guarantee it to be perfect, and it should prove not to be so, you must make
good to me any loss which I may have sustained on that account; but if it is
not understood that you guarantee it to be perfect, you will only be liable for
fraud.
Labeo is of a different opinion, and thinks it should only be held that the
party must guarantee that the vase is perfect, where the contrary had not been
agreed upon; and this opinion is correct. Minicius states that Sabinus gave it
as his opinion that a similar guarantee should be understood to be made where
casks were hired.
(5) If I sell you a right of way, you can only notify me to prove my title to
the same where the land for which you wish to acquire the servitude is yours;
for it would be unjust for me to be liable, if you could not acquire the
servitude because you were not the owner of the adjoining land.
(6) If, however, I should sell you a tract of land, and state that a right of
way was attached to the same; I will certainly be liable on ac-
count of the right of way, because I am bound as the vendor of both these
rights of property.
(7) If a son under paternal control sells and delivers property to me, he will
be liable, just as if he were the head of a household.
(8) If the vendor has committed any fraudulent act with reference to the
property sold, the purchaser will be entitled to an action of purchase on that
ground. For it is necessary to consider any fraud in the trial of the case, and
whatever the vendor has promised to furnish he must deliver to the purchaser.
(9) If the vendor knowingly sells property which is encumbered, or which
belongs to another, and it is set forth in the contract that he binds himself
for nothing on this account, it is necessary to take into consideration his
fraudulent conduct which ought always to be absent in the transaction of a sale
which is one of good faith.
7. The Same, On Sabinus, Book X.
When you sold me a tract of land of which the usufruct was reserved, you stated
that the said usufruct belonged to Titius, when, in fact, it remained in your
hands. If you should bring an action to recover possession of said usufruct, I
cannot have recourse to you as long as Titius is living; and he is not in such
a situation that even if the usufruct was his, he would lose it, for then,
(that is to say, if Titius should forfeit his civil rights, or die) I could
have recourse to you as the vendor.
The same rule of law applies if you should state that the usufruct belongs to
Titius, while, in reality, it belongs to Seius.
8. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book V.
If I should deliver to you a field free of all encumbrance, when, in fact, I
ought to have delivered it as subject to a servitude; I will have the right to
bring an action for the recovery of an unascertained amount, in order to compel
you to permit the servitude which is due to be imposed.
(1) If I transfer a field subject to a servitude, which I should transfer to
you as free; you will be entitled to an action on purchase, in order to release
said servitude, which you ought not to be burdened with.
9. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XX.
If he who purchased stones on a tract of land refuses to remove them, an action
on sale can be brought against him to compel him to do so.
10. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLVI.
It is not unusual for one person to be liable to two obligations with reference
to the same matter, at the same time; for when one who has a vendor bound
becomes heir of another to whom the same vendor is liable, it is established
that there are two concurrent rights of action united in the same person, one
which he has as his own, and the other
which is derived from the estate; and the appointed heir, if he wishes for his
own convenience to avail himself of the two actions separately, must bring his
own against the vendor before he enters on the estate, and then, after he has
done so, bring the one which is derived from
the latter.
If he should first enter upon the estate, he can only bring one action, but he
can do this in such a way as to obtain the greatest advantage from both
contracts. On the other hand, if one vendor should become the heir to the
other, it is clear that he must guarantee the purchaser doubly against
eviction.
11. The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXII.
He who makes a purchase can avail himself of the action on purchase.
(1) In the first place, it must be remembered that, in a case of this kind,
there should only be introduced what can properly be the subject of a
guarantee, for since this is a bona fide action, there is nothing more
consistent with good faith than that what was agreed upon between the
contracting parties should be carried out. If, however, nothing was specially
agreed upon, they will then be liable to one another for whatever naturally
comes within the scope of the transaction.
(2) First, the vendor must transfer the property itself, that is to say,
deliver it; and the ownership of said property will pass to the purchaser, if,
in fact, it belonged to the vendor. If it did not belong to him, the vendor
will only be bound in case of eviction, provided the price was paid, or
security furnished for the same. The purchaser, however, can be compelled to
pay the purchase-money to the vendor.
(3) Both Labeo and Sabinus hold that the restitution of the price in case of a
defective title is also embraced in the transaction of purchase; and we approve
their opinion.
(4) The vendor should also guarantee the soundness of animals and he who sells
beasts of burden usually promises that they will eat and drink as they should
do.
(5) Where anyone thinking that he is purchasing a female slave as a virgin,
when she is a woman, and the vendor knowingly permits him to make this mistake;
an action for the restitution of the price will, however, not lie in this
instance, but an action can be brought on purchase for the rescinding of the
contract, and when the price is refunded, the female slave should be returned.
(6) Where a person purchases wine, and pays a certain sum by way of earnest,
and afterwards it is agreed that the purchase shall be void; Julianus says that
an action on purchase can be brought for the recovery of the earnest, and that
an equitable action on purchase will also lie for the purpose of annulling the
sale.
I propose the following question, namely: Suppose a ring is given by way of
earnest, and that the sale is concluded, the price paid and the property
delivered, but the ring is not returned; what proceeding should be instituted?
Should it be a personal suit for recovery, where something has been given for a
certain purpose and the purpose has
been accomplished; or ought an action on sale to be brought? Julianus says that
an action on sale will lie. It is certain that a personal action for recovery
can be brought, for the ring is now in the hands of the vendor without any
reason.
(7) Neratius says that the vendor will be liable to the purchaser, if he sells
him a slave as not being in the habit of running away, even if he is not aware
of the fact.
(8) Neratius says that the same rule applies, even if you should sell a slave
belonging to another, and that you are obliged to guarantee him to be free from
liability to prosecution for theft, or damages of any kind; and that it has
generally been held by all authorities that an action on purchase will lie, to
enable the buyer to be furnished security to hold the slave without
interference, and, also, that possession may be delivered to him.
(9) He also says that if the vendor does not deliver the slave, judgment shall
be rendered against him for the amount of the interest of the purchaser; and if
he does not furnish security, judgment must be rendered against him for the
largest amount for which a vendor can be liable.
(10) Neratius also says that, in all these instances, security must be given
for the greatest amount that can be recovered; that is to say, in case of
subsequent action, the damages must be assessed after deduction has been made
of the amount of the security.
(11) He also very properly holds that if security is not furnished for one
article, when it has been done for others, judgment must be rendered without
any deduction.
(12) He also says in the Second Book of Opinions: "Where a purchaser has
judgment rendered against him in a noxal action, he can only recover in an
action on purchase the least amount for which he could be released." He
likewise holds that, if an action on stipulation was brought by the purchaser,
whether the latter has defended the noxal action or not, for the reason that it
was evident that the slave had committed damage, he can, nevertheless, proceed
by an action on stipulation, or by one on purchase.
(13) Neratius also says that a vendor should, in delivering the property, place
the purchaser in such a position that he will have the advantage in a contest
for its possession. Julianus, however, in the Fifteenth Book of the Digest,
states that the property should not be held to be delivered, if the better
title to possession is not enjoyed by the purchaser. Therefore, an action on
purchase will lie unless this advantage is conferred.
(14) Cassius says that a party who has obtained an assessment of damages
founded upon a double stipulation cannot recover anything on account of other
property, with reference to which it is customary to provide security in the
case of sales. Julianus thinks that where there is no double stipulation, an
action on purchase should be brought.
(15) Finally, he says in the Tenth Book on Minicius, "That if anyone sells a
slave under the condition that he will pay double damages within thirty days if
the title is not good, and that he shall not, after
that time, be liable for anything," and the purchaser does not require the
amount to be paid within the designated period, the vendor will not be liable,
provided he ignorantly sold a slave belonging to another; for, in this
instance, he is only compelled to guarantee the purchaser that the title will
not be disputed by himself or by his heirs.
Where anyone knowingly sells a slave belonging to another, he holds that the
vendor is not free from fraud and therefore will be liable to an action on
purchase.
(16) I think that the opinion of Julianus with reference to pledges is also
perfectly correct; for where the creditor lawfully sells a pledge, and
afterwards the purchaser is deprived of it by someone with a better title, he
will not be liable, and he cannot be sued in an action on purchase for the
recovery of the price; for this point has been settled by several Imperial
Constitutions.
It is clear that the vendor must give a guarantee against fraud; for he
expressly binds himself in this respect, but even though he does not do so, and
sells the property, being aware that he had no claim on it, or that it did not
belong to the party who pledged it to him; he will be liable to an action on
purchase, because we have shown that he should be responsible for bad faith.
(17) If anyone should sell property, and should state at the time that its
accessories will pass to the purchaser, everything which we have said with
reference to the sale of property will apply in this instance, except that the
vendor will not be liable for double damages in case of eviction, but will only
be required to maintain the purchaser in possession, and this not only applies
to himself but to all others.
(18) Where a person who makes a sale agrees to maintain the purchaser in
possession, let us see to what extent he becomes liable. I think that it makes
considerable difference whether he promises that the purchaser shall not be
disturbed either by him or by persons descended from him, or whether he agrees
that his possession shall not be disputed by anyone whomsoever; for where he
makes the promise for himself he is not held to warrant the title against
others. Hence, if the property is recovered by someone with a better title, or
a stipulation is entered into, the vendor will not be liable under the
stipulation; or, if one should not be made, he will not be liable on the ground
of purchase.
Julianus, however, states in the Fifteenth Book of the Digest that, even if the
vendor plainly states that the purchaser shall have undisturbed possession, so
far as he and his heirs are concerned; the defence can be made that the party
is not liable on purchase for the amount of the interest of the buyer, but will
only be liable for the refunding of the price.
He also says that the same rule applies where it is clearly stated in the
contract of sale that no warranty is given against eviction, and, that in case
eviction takes place, the vendor will be liable for the price paid, but not for
any indemnity, as contracts made in good faith do not permit an agreement to be
entered into by which the purchaser may lose the property, and the vendor
retain the price; unless, as he says, anyone should consent to abide by all the
agreements above men-
tioned, just as is the case where the vendor receives the money and the
merchandise does not come into the hands of the purchaser; as, for instance,
where we buy a future cast of a net by a fisherman, or whatever game may be
taken in snares laid by a hunter, or any birds caught by a fowler; for even if
nothing is taken, the purchaser will, nevertheless, be required to pay the
price.
The contrary, however, must be held with reference to the agreements above
mentioned, unless the vendor knowingly sold the property of another; for then,
in accordance with the opinion of Julianus quoted above by us, it must be held
that he will be liable to an action on purchase, for the reason that he
committed a fraudulent act.
12. Celsus, Digest, Book XXVII.
If I purchase the cast of a fisherman's net, and the latter refuses to cast his
net, the uncertainty of the result must be taken into account in assessing the
damages. If the fisherman refuses to deliver to me the fish which he has
caught, an estimate should be made of what he did catch.
13. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.
Julianus, in the Fifteenth Book, makes a distinction with reference to
rendering a decision in an action on purchase between a person who knowingly
sold the property, and one who ignorantly did so; for he says that anyone who
sold a flock which is diseased, or a defective beam, and did so ignorantly,
must make the claim good in an action on purchase, to the extent that the buyer
would have paid less if he had been aware of said defects. If, however, he was
aware of them, and kept silent, and deceived the purchaser, he will be obliged
to make good all the loss which the purchaser sustained from said sale.
Therefore, if a building should fall down on account of the defect in the price
of the timber aforesaid, its entire value must be estimated in assessing
damages; or if the flock should die through the contagion of the disease, the
purchaser must be indemnified to the extent of the interest he had in the sale
of the property in good condition.
(1) Moreover, where anyone sells a slave who is a thief, or one who has the
habit of running away, and does this knowingly, he should indemnify the
purchaser to the amount of his interest in not being deceived. If, however, he
was ignorant of this when he sold him the slave, he will be liable with respect
to a slave who has the habit of run-ing away to the extent of the lesser amount
which the purchaser would have paid if he had known that he had such a habit;
but he will not be liable at all, where the slave is a thief.
The reason for this distinction is, that a fugitive slave cannot be kept in
custody, and the vendor is held liable, as it were, on the ground of eviction;
but we can restrain a slave who is a thief.
(2) A great deal is included in the clause which we mentioned, namely: "To the
amount of the interest of the purchaser in not being deceived," as, for
instance, if he had solicited others to run away with him, or had stolen
property at the time he fled.
(3) What would be the case, however, if the vendor was not aware that the slave
was a thief, and had given the assurance that he was frugal and faithful, and
sold him at a high price? Let us see if he would be liable to an action on
purchase. I think that he would be liable, but suppose that he was ignorant of
the character of the slave? He ought not to assert so positively something that
he did not know.
There is then a difference between this instance and that where the vendor knew
the character of the slave, for he who knows should warn the purchaser that he
is a thief, but in the other instance, he should not be so ready to make a rash
statement.
(4) Where the vendor committed a fraudulent act in order to sell the property
at a higher price; for example, if he lied concerning the skill of the slave,
or with reference to his peculium, he will be liable in an action on purchase,
for the additional amount which he was paid for the slave on the assumption
that he had private property, or was skilled in some trade.
(5) On the other hand, Julianus also says that Terentius Victor died leaving
his brother his heir, and that a steward abstracted from the property of the
estate certain articles, documents, and slaves, and after these were taken
away, the estate was easily made to appear to be of little value; and the
steward persuaded the heir to transfer to him his rights in the same. Would he
be liable to an action on sale? Julianus says that an action on sale will lie
only for the extent to which the estate would have been more valuable if the
said property had not been removed.
(6) Julianus also says that the vendor is usually responsible for fraud, and he
explains this by means of the following case. Where a vendor knew that the land
which he offered for sale was charged with legacies to several municipalities,
and stated in the advertisement that it was only indebted to one municipality,
but afterwards inserted in the contract of sale that, if any tributes, taxes,
or anything by way of imposts, or for the repair of highways, should be due,
the purchaser must make payment, perform said acts, and be responsible; the
vendor will be liable to an action on purchase as having deceived the
purchaser. This opinion is correct.
(7) But as it was, in fact, suggested that certain guardians had acted in this
way who sold property belonging to a ward, he says that the question is whether
the ward should be held liable for the fraud of his guardians? If, indeed, the
said guardians sold the property, there is no doubt whatever that they are
liable to an action on purchase. Where, however, the ward sold the property by
their authority, he will only be liable for the amount by which he profited by
the transaction, and judgment should be rendered against the guardians for the
remainder, without reference to limitation of time, because liability for
fraudulent acts of his guardians does not attach to the ward after he arrives
at puberty.
(8) When the buyer brings an action on purchase, the price should be tendered
by him; and therefore, even though he only tenders a por-
tion of the price, an action on purchase will not lie, for the vendor has a
right to retain the property which he sold, by way of pledge.
(9) Wherefore, the question arises where part of the price is paid and the
property is delivered, but is afterwards lost through proof of a superior
title, can the purchaser proceed by an action on purchase to recover the entire
price of the property, or merely what he paid?
I think the better opinion is that he can recover only what he paid; otherwise,
he would be met by an exception on the ground of fraud.
(10) Where a field is sold on which the crops have already matured, it is
settled that they must also be delivered to the purchaser; unless some other
agreement has been made.
(11) If, however, the field was leased, the rent must be paid to the party who
leased it. The same rule applies to urban estates, unless some express
agreement is made to the contrary.
(12) Where, however, the vendor had acquired any rights of action for injury
committed against the property; for instance, for the prevention of threatened
injury, or for the care of rainwater, or under the Lex Aquilia,or an interdict
against clandestine or violent possession, they must be assigned to the
purchaser.
(13) Again, where any profit has been obtained from the labor of slaves, or
from transportation by beasts of burden, or ships, it must be turned over to
the purchaser, as well as any increase of the peculium of the slaves; but not,
however, where any gain has been acquired by means of the property of the
vendor.
(14) Titius sold a tract of land containing ninety jugera, and it was stated in
the contract of sale that there were a hundred jugera in said tract, and before
the measurement was taken ten jugera were added to it by alluvial deposit; I
concur in the opinion of Neratius, who held that if the vendor was aware of the
deficiency when he sold the land, an action on purchase could be brought
against him, even though ten jugera had been added to the tract; because he was
guilty of fraud which was not removed by the addition. If, however, he made the
sale ignorantly, an action on purchase will not lie.
(15) If you sell me a tract of land belonging to another, and it afterwards
becomes mine by a good title, I will, nevertheless, be entitled to an action on
purchase against you.
(16) With respect to those things, however, which it is customary to furnish
with the property purchased, I think that the vendor will not only be liable
for fraud but also for negligence; as Celsus states in the Eighth Book of the
Digest that, when it is agreed that the vendor shall collect any rent which is
past due, and pay it to the purchaser, in case of his failure to do so, he will
not only be liable for fraud but also for negligence.
(17) Celsus also says in the same book: You sold your share of a tract of land
which you held in common with Titius, and before you delivered possession you
were compelled to join issue in an action in partition. If the tract of land
was entirely adjudged to your fellow-owner, you can recover from Titius on this
account the amount which you are obliged to pay to the purchaser; but if the
entire tract is ad-
judged to you, he says that you can transfer it all to the purchaser, in such a
way, however, that he must pay to Titius the amount for which judgment has been
rendered against you in this matter, and that you must provide security against
eviction with reference to the part which you sold; but so far as the remainder
is concerned, you will only be responsible for fraud. For, indeed, it is only
just that the purchaser should be placed in the same position as if the action
for partition had been brought against him.
If, however, the judge divided the tract between you and Titius by certain
boundaries, there is no doubt that you must deliver to the purchaser whatever
has been adjudged to you.
(18) Where a vendor has given anything to a slave who was sold before his
delivery took place, this also must be turned over to the purchaser, as well as
any estates, and all legacies acquired by the slave; nor shall any distinction
be made with reference to him by whom these things were left. Moreover,
whatever has been obtained by the labors of the slave must be delivered to the
purchaser, unless the day of delivery has been deferred by agreement, in order
that the proceeds of the labors of the slave may belong to the vendor.
(19) The vendor is entitled to an action on sale to recover from the purchaser
all that the latter is obliged to give him.
(20) All the matters hereinafter stated are included in this action; first, the
price for which the property was sold, as well as the interest on the same
after the day of delivery, for when the purchaser enjoys the property, it is
perfectly just that he should pay interest on the purchase-money.
(21) We must understand delivery of possession to take place to mean even where
the possession is precarious; for we should only consider whether the purchaser
has the power to gather the crops.
(22) Again, the vendor can also recover any expenses incurred with reference to
the property sold, by bringing an action on sale; for example, if something was
expended on the buildings which were disposed of; as Labeo and Trebatius both
say that an action on sale can be brought on this ground.
The same rule applies where expense has been incurred for the cure of a sick
slave before his delivery, or where anything has been expended in instruction,
which it is probable that the purchaser would wish to be so expended. Labeo
goes still further, and says, that where anything has been expended on the
funeral of a dead slave, it must be recovered in an action on sale, provided
the slave died without any blame attaching to the vendor.
(23) Moreover, if, when the property was sold, it was agreed that a solvent
debtor should be furnished by the purchaser, the vendor can proceed by an
action on sale to compel him to do this.
(24) If it was agreed between the purchaser and the vendor of certain lands,
that, if the purchaser or his heir should sell said lands for a higher price
than he had paid, that he would refund to the vendor half the amount of the
excess; and the heir of the purchaser should sell said lands at a higher price,
the vendor can, by means of an action
on sale, recover the amount of his share of the excess for which the property
had been sold.
(25) If an agent should make the sale and furnish security to the purchaser;
the question arises whether an action should be granted in favor of the owner,
or against him? Papinianus, in the Third Book of Opinions, thinks that an
equitable action on purchase can be brought against the owner in the same way
as an Institorian Action, provided the owner directed the property to be sold.
Hence, on the other hand, it must be said that an equitable action on purchase
can be brought by the owner.
(26) Papinianus says in the same place, that he gave it as his opinion that,
where it had been agreed upon that if the price was not paid at the appointed
time, double the amount should be paid to the vendor, such a provision seemed
to have been added in violation of the constitution, because it exceeded the
lawful interest; and he also stated that the case of a conditional rescission
of a sale was different from this one; for, in that instance, illegal interest
is not agreed upon, and the terms of the contract are not considered
dishonorable.
(27) Where anyone, acting in collusion with my agent, makes a purchase from
him, can he bring an action on purchase against me? I think he can, to the
extent of compelling me either to abide by the purchase, or annul it.
(28) Where anyone takes advantage of another under the age of twenty-five, we
will grant him an action on purchase, to the same extent as that which we
mentioned in the former instance.
(29) Where anyone makes a purchase from a ward without the authority of his
guardian, the contract is only valid on one side; for he who makes the purchase
is liable to the ward, but he does not make the ward liable to him.
(30) Where a vendor reserves a lodging, for instance, that it shall be
permitted for a tenant to reside in the house, or that a tenant, who was a
farmer, shall have a right to the crops for a certain time; Servius thinks the
better opinion to be that an action on sale will lie. Finally, Tubero says
that, if the said tenant causes any damage, the buyer, by bringing an action on
purchase, can compel the vendor to proceed against the tenant in an action on
lease, and pay the purchaser whatever he recovers.
(31) Where a house is sold or devised, we are accustomed to state that
everything is included in the house which is considered to be part of the same,
or is used for the benefit of it; as, for instance, the stone edge of a well.
14. Pomponius, On Quintus Mucius, Book XXXI.
That is to say by means of which use of the well is obtained.
15. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.
Well-ropes and basins, projecting gutters, and also the pipes connected with
the latter, although they may project a considerable distance beyond the
building, belong to the latter as well as the gutters.
Fish, however, which may be in a reservoir, do not belong either to the house
or to the land;
16. Pomponius, On Quintus Mucius, Book XXXI.
Any more than the chickens or other animals on the premises.
17. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.
Nothing belongs to the land unless it is attached to the soil. It must not be
forgotten that many things form part of a building which are not attached to
the same, as for instance, locks, keys,1 and bolts. There are also many things
buried in the earth which do not belong to the land, or to a farm-house, for
example, wine-vats and presses, for since these are rather considered
implements, they also are attached to the buildings.
(1) Moreover, it is settled that wine, and crops which have been gathered, do
not belong to the house.
(2) Where a tract of land is sold or devised, the manure-heaps and straw belong
to the purchaser or the legatee, the wood, however, belongs to the vendor or
the heir; for the reason that the former do not constitute part of the land,
even though they may have been collected for the benefit of the same. With
reference to the manure-heaps, a distinction is made by Trebatius, who holds
that if they have been prepared for the purpose of fertilizing the ground, they
belong to the purchaser, but if for the purpose of sale, the vendor is entitled
to them, unless some other agreement has been made; and that it makes no
difference whether the manure remains in a stable or has been placed in
a heap.
(3) Any paintings attached to the wall, as well as any marble encrusted upon
the same, belong to the house.
(4) Nets about the columns and couches around the walls, as well as hangings of
haircloth, are not parts of the house.
(5) Moreover, anything which has been prepared for a house but has not yet been
finished, even though it may be placed in the building, is, nevertheless, not
considered to be a part of it.
(6) Where, in a sale, reservation is made of everything which has been taken
out, or cut down; sand, lime, and other things of this kind are held to have
been taken out, and trees which have been felled, charcoal, and other similar
articles are considered to have been cut.
Gallus Aquilius, however, whose opinion is given by Mela, states very properly
that a provision with reference to articles which have
1 The late General Benjamin P. Butler, of Massachusetts, once defended a man
for taking a door-key out of a lock. The commission of the act was proved
beyond all question, the culprit having been caught flagrante delicto. After
the State had rested its case, Butler moved the court to direct an acquittal,
on the ground that where a key is in its proper place in a door it is real-
estate, and cannot be the subject of larceny. The judge decided the point to be
well taken, and granted the motion without argument.
Whatever opinion may be entertained of Butler as a soldier and a politician,
there can be no doubt of his legal acumen and consummate ability as a criminal
lawyer. --- ED.
been taken out and cut down is included, without effect, in a contract of sale;
because if they are not expressly sold, an action can be brought to compel them
to be produced; as a vendor is not required to give security with reference to
any material which has been cut, or for stone or sand, any more than he is for
other things which are more valuable.
(7) Labeo states, as a general proposition, that whatever is in a building for
its perpetual use belongs to it, but that which is only for temporary use does
not; as, for instance, pipes which are only attached to it for a time, do not
belong to the house, but if they are fastened to it permanently, they form a
part of it.
(8) Reservoirs lined with lead, wells, and the covers of the latter which are
placed upon the land, but are not attached to it, it is settled belong to the
house.
(9) It is also settled that small images, columns, and figures through the
mouths of which water is accustomed to flow, belong to the house.
(10) Anything which has been removed from a building with the intention of
being replaced, forms a part of it; but whatever has been prepared to be placed
upon it does not.
(11) Stakes which have been prepared for a vineyard do not form part of the
land before they have been placed in position, but they do belong to it if they
have been purchased with the understanding that they shall be so placed.
18. Javolenus, On Cassius, Book VII.
Granaries, which are usually made of boards, belong to the building, if their
foundations are in the earth; but if they are above ground, they should be
classed as movable property.
(1) Tiles which have not yet been placed upon buildings, although they have
been brought there for that purpose, are included in the class of personal
property. A different rule applies to those which have been removed with the
intention of being replaced, for they are accessories to the house.
19. Gaius, On the Edict of the Prौtor, Title "Publicans."
The ancients, in speaking of purchase and sale, made use of these terms without
distinction.
20. The Same, On the Provincial Edict, Book XXI. The same rule applies to cases
of leasing and hiring.
21. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXIII.
Where a female slave is sold with her offspring, and she proves to be sterile,
or more than fifty years of age, and the purchaser was ignorant of the fact,
the vendor will be liable to an action on sale.
(1) Where the vendor of a tract of land knowingly refrains from mentioning any
tax which is due upon the same, he will be liable to an action on purchase.
But, if he did not give notice of it through ignorance, because, for instance,
the land belonged to an estate, he will not be liable.
(2) Although we stated above that, while we may agree with reference to the
object of a sale, but differ as to its quality, a sale will take place; still,
the vendor should be liable for the amount of the interest the purchaser had in
not being deceived, even if the vendor also is ignorant of the facts; as, for
example, where tables are sold as being made of cedar-wood, when in fact they
are not.
(3) When the vendor is to blame for not delivering the property, all the
interest of the purchaser in its delivery, which merely has reference to the
property itself, should be taken into consideration; where, for instance, he
could have profited by the sale of wine, this need not be taken into account
any more than if he had purchased wheat, and, because it had not been
delivered, his slaves suffered from hunger; for the value of the wheat, and not
that of the slaves about to die of hunger, was the object of the claim. Nor
does the obligation become greater, where proceedings are instituted
subsequently, even though the wine may have increased in value. This is
reasonable, because if the wine had been delivered, the purchaser would have
possession of it; but where this has not been done, the vendor is at all events
obliged to deliver at present what he should have delivered long before.
(4) If I sell you a tract of land on condition that I can lease it from you for
a certain sum, I will be entitled to an action on sale, because this
transaction is, as it were, a part of the price.
(5) Even though I sold you a tract of land on condition that you would not sell
it to anyone but myself, for this reason an action on sale will lie if you
should sell it to another.
(6) A man sold a house and reserved for himself a lodging therein as long as he
lived, or in consideration of the payment of ten aurei every year. The first
year, the purchaser preferred to pay the ten aurei, the second year, he
furnished the lodging. Trebatius says that he had the right to change his mind,
and could comply with either one of the conditions every year, and as long as
he was ready to do so there would be no cause of action.
22. Julianus, Digest, Book VII.
If the vendor makes a false statement as to the quality of the land, but not as
to its amount, he will still be liable to the purchaser. For suppose that he
alleged that there were fifty jugera of vineyard and fifty of meadow, and it
was ascertained that there were less than this in the vineyard, and more in the
meadow, there would, nevertheless, be one hundred jugerain all.
23. The Same, Digest, Book XIII.
If anyone should manumit a slave, after he had sold him together with his
peculium, he will be liable not only for the peculium which the slave had at
the time when he was manumitted, but also for what he acquired afterwards; and
he must, in addition, furnish security to restore anything which might come
into his hands from the estate of the freedman. Marcellus says in a note that
the vendor is compelled, in an action on sale, to deliver whatever the
purchaser would have ob-
tained if the slave had not been manumitted. Therefore, nothing is included
which he would have acquired if the slave had not been manumitted.
24. Julianus, Digest, Book XV.
Where a slave in whom you had an usufruct purchases a tract of land, and,
before the purchase-money is paid, you lose your civil rights, even though you
may have paid the price, you will not be entitled to an action on purchase,
because of your loss of civil rights, but you can bring suit against the vendor
to recover money which was not due. It makes no difference whether you, or the
slave, have made payment out of the peculium belonging to you, where this is
done before your loss of civil rights, for, in both instances, you will be
entitled to an action on purchase.
(1) I purchased your slave from a thief in good faith, not knowing that he had
been stolen, and the said slave bought another with the peculiumbelonging to
you, and delivered him to me; Sabinus says that you can bring a personal action
against me to recover the latter slave. If, however, I have lost anything by
the transaction, which he negotiated, I can, on the other hand, bring an action
on the ground of the peculium against you. Cassius states that this opinion of
Sabinus is correct, with which I also agree.
(2) Where one slave, having sold another, furnishes a surety, the latter should
guarantee the validity of the sale by which he will be bound to the same extent
as if he were giving security for a freeman; as an action is granted to the
purchaser against the master for the purpose of recovering everything which he
could have recovered if the sale had been made by a freeman; but the master
cannot have judgment rendered against him for an amount above the value of the
peculium.
25. The Same, Digest, Book LIV.
When anyone purchases a vintage which is not yet harvested, and is forbidden by
the vendor to gather the grapes, he can avail himself of an exception against
him if suit is brought for the purchase-money, and not for the recovery of the
property which was sold, but not delivered. But if, after delivery has been
made, the purchaser is forbidden to press the grapes which have been gathered,
or to remove the new wine, he can bring an action for production, or for injury
committed, just as if he were forbidden to remove any other property whatsoever
which belonged to him.
26. Alfenus Verus, Digest, Book II.
If anyone, when he sold a tract of land, stated that there were a hundred casks
on the premises, which were accessory to the same; even though there was but
one cask there, he will, nevertheless, be compelled to furnish a hundred casks
to the purchaser.
27. Paulus, Epitomes of Alfenus, Book III.
Whatever the vendor states is an accessory must be delivered sound and in good
condition; as, for instance, where he says that a certain number of casks are
an accessory to the land, he must furnish them whole and not broken.
28. Julianus, On Urseius Ferox, Book III.
You sold me certain lands, and it was agreed between us that I should perform
some act, and that, if I did not do so, I should be liable to a penalty. The
opinion was given that the vendor can bring an action on sale before suing for
the penalty under the stipulation, and if he should recover an amount equal to
that fixed as a penalty, he will be barred by an exception on the ground of
fraud, if he brings an action on the stipulation. If you should recover the
penalty by an action on the stipulation, you will be prevented by operation of
law from bringing an action on the sale, unless the amount of the judgment is
less than the interest of the vendor in having the agreement executed.
29. The Same, On Minicius, Book IV.
Where property has been left to someone under a condition, and the latter,
ignorant of the fact, buys it from the heir, the purchaser can recover the
price by an action on purchase, because he has not possession of the property
as derived from the legacy.
30. Africanus, Questions, Book VIII.
A slave that you purchased from me together with his peculium,committed a theft
against me before he was delivered to you. Although the property which he stole
has been destroyed, I will, nevertheless, have the right to retain its value
out of the peculium, that is to say, the act of the slave diminishes the
peculium to the extent to which he has become my debtor on account of his
crime. For even if he should steal something from me after his delivery, or I
should not be entitled to an action for recovery from the peculium on that
ground, or I should be entitled to it to the extent that the peculium was
increased by the addition of the stolen property; I would still have a right,
in the proposed case, to retain the peculium, and I could bring a personal
action for recovery on the ground that I had paid more than was due, if the
entire risk attached to you.
In accordance with this, it must be held that if the said slave had stolen any
money from me, and you, being ignorant of the fact that it had been stolen,
should take and use it as a part of the peculium; I will be entitled to an
action for recovery against you on the ground that property belonging to me had
come into your hands without any consideration.
(1) If you should knowingly sell me property belonging to another, while I was
ignorant of the fact, Julianus holds that I can properly bring an action on
purchase against you, even before I am deprived of the property on the ground
of a better title, for an amount equal to
my interest in having it become mine; for although, on the other hand, it is
true that the vendor is only liable for the delivery of the property to the
purchaser, and not to transfer the title to him, still, for the reason that he
should guarantee that he is not committing fraud, he who knowingly sells the
property of another to one who is ignorant that it is not his, is liable. This
rule is especially applicable if he should manumit a slave, or sell property
which was to be given in pledge.
31. Neratius, Parchments, Book III.
If the property which I am obliged to deliver in accordance with the contract
of sale is taken from me by force, although I am required to be responsible for
its safe-keeping, it is still more proper that I should only be required to
transfer to the purchaser my rights of action for the recovery of said
property; because its safe custody is of very little advantage where violence
is employed. I should assign to you not only the rights of action which relate
to profit, but also such as have reference to loss, so that you may obtain all
the gain as well as be responsible for the expense.
(1) I should assign to you not only what I myself have acquired by means of the
said property, but also what the purchaser would have acquired if the slave had
been delivered to him at once.
(2) Two of us purchased the same property from a party who was not the owner,
the purchase and sale were concluded without bad faith. and the property was
delivered. Whether we both made the purchase from the same person, or from two
different ones, he must be protected who first acquired his right; that is to
say, the one to whom delivery was first made. Where one of two parties makes a
purchase from the owner of the property, he must by all means be protected.
32. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XL
If anyone should buy oil from me, and accept it after having employed false
weights in order to deceive me, or the purchaser is taken advantage of by the
vendor through the use of weights that are too light, Pomponius says that the
vendor will be entitled to an action to compel the purchaser to pay the value
of the excess; which is reasonable. Hence the buyer will also be entitled to an
action on purchase for the purpose of obtaining satisfaction.
33. The Same, On the Edict, Book XXIII.
Where several articles are purchased for a single price, an action on purchase
and sale can be brought with reference to each one of them.
34. The Same, On the Edict, Book XVIII.
Where a tract of land is sold, and fraud is committed with reference to the
quality of the jugera, an action on purchase will lie.
35. The Same, On the Edict, Book LXX.
Where anyone purchases a tract of land presumed to be free from rights of way,
and he is forbidden to pass through it, and is defeated
in court; he will be entitled to an action on purchase. For although no
stipulation with reference to eviction was made, because the judgment rendered
with reference to the servitude is not final, so far as the property itself is
concerned, still it must be said that an action on purchase will lie.
36. Paulus, On Plautius, Book VII.
The vendor of a house should enter into a stipulation relative to threatened
injury before he conveys it, for the reason that he is obliged to exercise
proper care and diligence before he delivers the possession of the property,
and it is a part of said care and diligence to make such a stipulation, and
therefore if he neglects to do so he will be liable to the purchaser.
37. The Same, On Plautius, Book XIV.
Since, as it is only just that a purchaser in good faith should not be injured
by the fraud of another, so it is unjust that the vendor himself should profit
by his own fraud.1
38. Celsus, Digest, Book VIII.
Where the vendor of a slave stated that his peculium consisted of ten aurei,
that he would not deprive him of any of it, and that if it included more, he
would surrender it all; if it is more than that, he must give it all, unless
the intention was that he should only deliver the ten aurei;if it is less than
that, he must pay the ten, and give a slave who is possessed of a peculium of
that amount.
(1) Where the purchaser is to blame for the non-delivery of the slave to
himself, Sextus AElius and Drusus have stated that he can be compelled by
arbitration to indemnify the vendor for the maintenance of the slave; and this
opinion appears to me to be perfectly just.
(2) Firmus asked of Proculus whether the pipes which conduct water from a
leaden reservoir under ground into a brazen vessel built around the sides of a
house are to be considered part of the latter? Or are they to be considered as
personal property, united and stationary, which do not belong to the house? He
answered that the intention of the parties should be taken into account. But
what if neither the purchaser nor the vendor had paid any attention to the
subject, as very frequently occurs in cases of this kind? Would it not seem to
be better if we should hold that what is inserted and enclosed in a building
forms a portion of the same?
39. Modestinus, Rules, Book V.
I ask if anyone should sell a tract of land under the condition that all should
be considered to be sold which he possessed within certain boundaries, and the
vendor, nevertheless, well knew that he did not possess a certain part of said
land, and did not notify the purchaser of the fact; would he be liable to an
action on sale, since this general
1 "Nemo ex dolo suo proprio relevetur, aut auxilium capiat." --- ED.
rule ought not to apply to those portions of the land which the party who sold
them knew did not belong to him, and yet did not except them? Otherwise, the
purchaser would be taken advantage of, who if he had known this, would perhaps
not have purchased the property at all; or would have bought it at a lower
price if he had been notified with reference to its true amount; as this point
has been settled by the ancient authorities, with respect to a person who made
an exception, in the following terms, "Any servitudes that are due, shall
remain due." For persons learned in the law gave it as their opinion that, if a
vendor, knowing that servitudes were due to certain persons, did not notify the
purchaser, he would be liable to an action on purchase; for this general
exception does not refer to matters which the vendor was aware of, and which he
could and should expressly except, but to things of which he was ignorant, and
concerning which he could not notify the purchaser. Herennius Modestinus was of
the opinion that if the vendor in the case stated did anything for the purpose
of deceiving the purchaser, he could be sued in an action on purchase.
40. Pomponius, On Quintus Mucius, Book XXXI.
Quintus Mucius stated the following case. The owner of a tract of land sold the
standing trees on the same, and, after having received the money for the
property, refused to deliver it. The purchaser asked what course he should
take, and feared that the said trees would not be considered to belong to him.
Pomponius replied that the trees standing upon the land were not separate from
the latter, and therefore the purchaser could not bring suit to recover the
trees as the owner of the same, but he would be entitled to an action on
purchase.
41. Papinianus, Opinions, Book III.
In a contract of sale, nothing was stated with reference to the annual payment
due for an aqueduct passing under a house at Rome. The buyer having been
deceived would be entitled to an action on purchase on this ground; and
therefore, if he should be sued in an action on sale for the price, the
unexpected burden imposed upon him should be taken into consideration.
42. Paulus, Questions, Book II.
If the vendor of two tracts of land should make statements with reference to
the measurements of each, and then deliver both for a single price, and the
full amount should be lacking to one of the tracts, but the other should
contain more; for example, if he stated that one of them contained a hundred
jugera, and the other two hundred, it would be of no advantage to him if one of
them was found to contain two hundred, and the other fell short ten. A decision
on this point is given by Labeo. But can it be doubted that an exception on the
ground of bad faith will be available by the vendor? For instance, if a very
small portion of woodland was lacking, and the tract included a larger extent
of vineyard than had been promised, would not he who availed himself of his
perpetual right be guilty of fraud? For in the case
where the amount of land is found to be greater than had otherwise been stated,
this is not for the benefit of the vendor, but for that of the purchaser; and
the vendor is liable whenever the measurement is ascertained to be short. Let
us see, however, whether the vendor has no cause of complaint with reference to
the same land, where the vineyard is found to include more than the meadow, and
the measurement of the whole is correct.
The same question may arise in the case of two tracts of land, as where anyone
sells two slaves conditionally entitled to their freedom, for one price, and
says that one was ordered to pay ten aurei when he should have paid fifteen;
for he will be liable to an action on sale, even if the purchaser should have
received twenty aurei from the two.
It is more just, however, in all the above mentioned cases, for the profit to
be set off against the loss, and if anything is lacking to the purchaser,
either in the measurement or the quality of the land, he should be indemnified
for the same.
43. The Same, Questions, Book V.
When Titius died, he left Stichus, Pamphilus, and Arescusa in trust to Seia,
and directed that all of them should be given their freedom after the lapse of
a year. As the legatee was unwilling to accept the trust, and still could not
release the heir from the claim which she had against him, the heir sold the
said slaves to Sempronius, without mentioning that their freedom had been
bequeathed by the terms of the trust. The purchaser, after having made use of
the labor of the aforesaid slaves for several years, manumitted Arescusa; and
when the other slaves, having ascertained the intentions of the deceased,
demanded their freedom granted under the trust, and brought the heir before the
Prौtor, the slaves were manumitted by the former on the order of the Prौtor.
Arescusa answered that she was unwilling to have the purchaser for her patron.
When proceedings were instituted by the purchaser in an action on purchase to
recover from the vendor the price paid for the slaves including Arescusa; an
opinion of Domitius Ulpianus was read, in which it was held that if Arescusa
declined to have the purchaser for her patron, her act was justified by a
rescript of the Imperial Constitutions, but that the purchaser, after her
manumission, could not recover anything from the vendor.
I remember that Julianus held, with reference to this opinion, that the right
to an action on purchase continued to exist even after the manumission, and I
ask which opinion is correct? In this proceeding it was petitioned in the name
of the purchaser, that the expenses which he had incurred in the instruction of
one of the slaves should be refunded to him. I also ask, since Arescusa refused
to have the purchaser as her patron, by whose act she was liberated, and
whether she could have either the legatee who did not liberate her, or the heir
as her patron, for the other two slaves were manumitted by the heir. I answered
that I have always approved the opinion of Julianus, who
thought that the right of action was not extinguished in this way by
manumission.
But with reference to the expenses which the purchaser incurred in the
instruction of the slave, there is a point to be considered, for I think that
an action on purchase will be sufficient in a case of this kind, since not only
is the price involved, but all the interest of the purchaser in not being
deprived of the slave by eviction. It is clear that if the expense incurred in
the case you suggest exceeds the price to such an extent that the vendor would
not have thought that it would amount to so much; as, for instance, if we
suppose that the slave was purchased for a small sum and instructed as a
charioteer or an actor, and the owner was afterwards deprived of him by
eviction, it would seem to be unjust for the vendor to be liable for a larger
amount.
44. Africanus, Questions, Book VIII.
And suppose that the vendor was only in moderate circumstances, he cannot be
compelled to pay more than double the price.
45. Paulus, Questions, Book V.
Africanus states that Julianus held the same opinion, and this is just, as the
amount to be paid will be diminished if the value of the slave has depreciated
while in the hands of the purchaser, when he is recovered by a better title.
(1) The following is held to be more convenient, namely, if you should sell me
a vacant lot belonging to another, and I should build upon it, and the owner of
the property should recover it by eviction; for since the latter, in bringing
an action to recover said property, can be barred by an exception on the ground
of bad faith unless he pays the cost of the buildings, the better opinion is
that the vendor is not responsible for this. It must also be held in the case
of a slave that, if he is recovered under a better title, while he is still in
slavery and not after he has been set free, the owner must make good any outlay
and expenses incurred on his account. If the buyer is not in possession of the
building or the slave, he will be entitled to an action on purchase. In all
these instances, if anyone knowingly sells property belonging to another he
will, unquestionably, be liable.
(2) There still remains the third point, that is to say, who shall be the
patron of the freedwoman Arescusa, who refused to accept the purchaser as such?
It is held, and not without reason, that she ought to become the freedwoman of
the person by whom she is sold, that is to say, of the heir, because he himself
is liable to an action on purchase. This only applies where Arescusa does not
select the purchaser as her patron, for if she does, she will remain his
freedwoman, and he will not be entitled to an action on purchase, because he
has no longer any interest since he has her as his freedwoman.
46. The Same, Questions, Book XXIV.
Where anyone sells property belonging to another, and, in the meantime, becomes
the heir to the owner of said property, he will be compelled to conclude the
sale.
47. The Same, Opinions, Book VI.
Lucius Titius, having received money in payment for materials sold under a
fixed penalty, with the understanding that if they were not delivered in good
condition within a designated time, the penalty could be collected, died, after
a part of the materials had been delivered. Then, since the testator has become
liable for the penalty, and his heir will not produce the remaining materials,
can he be sued for the penalty and interest, especially when the purchaser had
borrowed the money at a very high rate of interest? Paulus answered that, under
the contract as stated, the heir of the vendor could be sued for the penalty,
and that, also, in an action on purchase, the court would take into
consideration the interest from the day when the vendor began to be in default.
48. Scौvola, Opinions, Book II.
Titius, the heir of Sempronius, sold a tract of land to Septicius as follows:
"I sell you the field which belonged to Sempronius, together with any rights
enjoyed by Sempronius in the same, for so much money." He delivered the mere
possession of said land, but did not point out the boundaries of the same. The
question arose, whether he could be compelled in an action on purchase to show
by documents belonging to the estate what rights the deceased had in said land,
and to point out its boundaries? I answered that everything should be done
under this written contract, which the parties understood to have been
intended. If this cannot be ascertained, the vendor must produce the documents
relating to the land, and point out its boundaries, for this is consistent with
the good faith of the contract.
49. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book II.
Where anyone, for the purpose of deceiving the purchaser, produces a false
tenant who is in collusion with him, he will be liable to an action on
purchase; nor can he defend himself by stating that he assumes the
responsibility for the tenant, and the rent for five years, if, by this means,
he contrived more readily to conceal the fraud.
(1) Where the principal of the price has been paid, although this has been done
after default, interest on it cannot be claimed, because it is not included in
the obligation, but depends upon the decision of the Court.
50. Labeo, Later Epitomes by Javolenus, Book IV.
Good faith does not tolerate that, where a buyer, through the indulgence of
some law, is not compelled to pay the price of the property purchased before it
is delivered to him, the vendor shall be compelled to deliver it, and
relinquish possession of the same. Where, however, possession has already been
delivered, the result will be that the vendor will lose the property; for
example, where the purchaser opposes the vendor, who claims the property, with
an exception on the ground of sale and delivery; and hence the case will be the
same as if the claimant had not either sold or delivered the property to him.
51. The Same, Later Epitomes by Javolenus, Book V.
Where the purchaser and the vendor are both in default with reference to the
delivery and acceptance, the result will be the same as if the purchaser alone
was responsible. For the vendor cannot be held to be in default with reference
to the purchaser, when the latter himself is also guilty of delay.
(1) Where you purchased a tract of land under the condition that you would pay
the purchase-money on the Kalends of July; even though, when the time had
expired, the vendor was at fault for the money not being paid to him, and
afterwards you were to blame for not paying it; I stated that the vendor could
avail himself of the condition stated in the contract, as against you; because
in making the sale it was the intention of the parties that if the purchaser
was in default for non-payment of the money, he would be liable for the penalty
mentioned in the contract. I think this opinion to be correct, unless the
vendor was guilty of fraud in the transaction.
52. Scौvola, Digest, Book VII.
A creditor held a tract of land which was encumbered to him, and also had in
his possession receipts for taxes previously paid by the debtor which had been
deposited with him; and he sold the land to Mौvius on the condition that the
purchaser should pay any taxes which might become due. The said land was sold
by the collector of taxes of the district in which it was situated, on account
of the taxes that had already been paid; the same Mौvius bought it and paid the
amount.
The question arose whether the buyer could sue the vendor in an action on
purchase, or in any other action, and compel him to surrender the receipts for
the payments above mentioned. The answer was that the buyer could proceed, by
an action on purchase, to compel the documents in question to be produced.
(1) A father having given to his daughter, by way of dowry, a certain tract of
land whose value had been appraised, the said land was found to be encumbered
to a creditor. The question arose whether a son, who had accepted the estate of
his father, would be liable to an action on purchase to obtain a release from
the creditor, and furnish the property free of encumbrance to the husband, as
the daughter, content with her dowry, had declined to accept her share of the
estate. The answer was that he would be liable.
(2) It was agreed between the vendor and the purchaser of an office in the
army, that the salary due to the former should be paid to the purchaser. The
question arose as to the amount which the purchaser should demand, and what the
vendor should pay to the purchaser in a transaction of this kind? The answer
was that the vendor should assign the extraordinary right of action which he
held on this account.
(3) A party who had a house on the sea-shore built a wall so that the shore, as
well as the house, was enclosed by it, and then sold the house to Gaius Seius.
I ask whether the shore which was enclosed with
the house by the vendor also belonged to the buyer by the right of purchase?
The answer was that the house would be sold in the same condition in which it
was before the sale was concluded.
53. Labeo, Probabilities, Book I.
Where it is stated in a contract that the rent of a house shall belong to the
purchaser; whatever the said house is rented for should be paid to the
purchaser. Paulus says that this is not altogether true, for if you rent an
entire house to one tenant for a certain sum, and the tenant sublets it for a
larger amount, and, in selling the house, you state that the rent is to be paid
to the purchaser, that only is included which the tenant owes you for the
entire house.
(1) If you sold a tract of land in which you have a burial-place and do not
expressly except it, you will have no security on this account. Paulus says
that this opinion is, by no means, just, provided a public highway runs by the
side of the burial-place.
(2) If, where a house is sold, lodgings in the same are reserved for the
occupants under the terms of the sale, such a reservation is properly made with
reference to all the occupants of said house, with the exception of the owner.
Paulus, however, says that if you had given free lodgings to anyone in the
house which you sold, and you should make the reservation in such a way that
the occupants, or any one of them, will have rent to pay at a certain time, you
will not properly provide for this; for it is necessary to make an express
reservation with reference to them. Therefore, the purchaser can, with
impunity, prevent the occupants from lodging in the house.
54. The Same, Probabilities, Book II.
Where a slave whom you have sold breaks a leg in doing something by your order,
the risk is not yours, if you directed him to perform some act which he was
accustomed to perform before the sale, and if you ordered him to do something
which you would have ordered him to do, even if he had not been sold. Paulus
says that this opinion is by no means correct; for if the slave had been
accustomed to perform some dangerous task before the sale, it will be held that
you were to blame for this; as, for instance, if you had been accustomed to
compel your slave to go down into a vault, or into a sewer.
The same rule of law applies if you were accustomed to order him to do
something which the wise and diligent head of a family would not order his
slave to do. What if this should be made the ground of an exception? He can,
nevertheless, direct the slave to perform some new task which he would not have
ordered him to perform if he had not been sold; for example, if he should order
him to go to the home of the purchaser, who lived in a distant place, for
certainly this would not be at your risk. Therefore, the entire matter merely
has reference to the fraud and negligence of the vendor.
(1) Where it is stated in the contract that there were eighty casks buried in
the ground, which were accessory to the land, and there are more than this; the
vendor must give to the purchaser the above men-
tioned number, making his selection from all the others as he wishes, provided
he delivers such as are sound. Where there are only eighty of them, they belong
to the purchaser, just as they are; and the vendor will not be obliged to pay
him anything for those that are not perfect.
55. Pomponius, Epistles, Book X.
Where a slave who has been purchased or promised is in the power of the enemy,
Octavenus thinks that the better opinion is that the sale and stipulation are
valid, because it is a transaction entered into between the purchaser and the
vendor; for the difficulty exists rather in furnishing what was agreed upon,
than in the nature of the transaction, for even if the delivery of the slave
should be ordered by the judge, it should be deferred until it can take place.


TITLE II. CONCERNING LEASING AND HIRING.

1. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXIV.
Leasing and hiring is a natural transaction common to all nations, and it is
contracted not by words but by consent, just like purchase and sale.
2. Gaius, Daily Events, Book II.
Leasing and hiring resembles purchase and sale, and is established by the same
rules of law. For as purchase and sale is contracted by an agreement as to the
price to be paid, so also is leasing and hiring understood to be contracted
where an agreement is made as to the rent.
(1) Purchase and sale is held to bear such a resemblance to leasing and hiring
that, in some instances, it is customary to make the inquiry as to whether the
transaction is one of purchase and sale, or one of leasing and hiring; for
example, if I have a contract with a goldsmith to make me some rings of a
certain weight, and of a designated form, and he agrees to make them for three
hundred aurei; is this a purchase and sale, or a leasing and hiring? It is held
that it is only a single transaction, and is rather a purchase and sale than a
leasing and hiring. If, however, I furnish him the gold, and compensation for
his work is agreed upon, there is no doubt that this is a leasing and hiring.
3. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book IX.
Where a tract of land is leased, and the tenant receives the implements for its
cultivation after they have been appraised, Proculus says that the intention of
the parties is that the tenant should have the implements, as being purchased;
just as when any property, after having been appraised, is given by way of
dowry.
4. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XVI.
A lease, or a precarious tenancy is made in the following terms, namely: "As
long as he who leases or gives the property may be willing," and it is
terminated by the death of the owner of the property.
5. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXVIII.
If I rent you a lodging and afterwards remit the rent, an action on leasing and
hiring will lie.
6. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book X.
Where anyone has rented property, he is not required to surrender what he
recovered on account of said property in an action for theft.
7. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.
If I rent you a house belonging to another for fifty aurei, and you rent the
same house to Titius for sixty, and Titius is forbidden by the owner to occupy
it; it is established that you can bring an action on hiring against me, to
recover sixty aurei, because you yourself are liable to Titius for sixty.
8. Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book IX.
Let us see whether neither sixty nor fifty aurei should be paid, but an amount
equal to the interest the tenant has in the enjoyment of the property leased,
so that the second lessor can only recover the sum that he owes to the party
who rented the property from him; and since the profit of the lease is to be
computed according to the amount of the higher rent, the result is that the sum
recovered should be greater. The first lessor will still have a right to claim
the fifty aurei which he would have collected from the first tenant, if the
owner had not forbidden the last tenant to occupy the house. This is our
practice.
9. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.
If anyone rents me a house or a tract of land which has been purchased in good
faith, and he is evicted from the same without fraud or negligence on his part;
Pomponius says that the lessor will, nevertheless, be liable to an action on
lease, in order that the lessee may be enabled to enjoy the property rented to
him. It is clear that if the owner will not allow him to occupy the premises,
and the lessor is ready to furnish him another house which is just as
convenient, he says that it would be perfectly just for the lessor to be
released from
his obligation.
(1) What Marcellus stated in the Sixth Book of the Digest may be added, namely:
"If an usufructuary rents a tract of land subject to an usufruct, for five
years, and dies; his heir will not be liable to permit him to enjoy the same,
any more than a lessor would be liable to a lessee after a house has been
destroyed by fire. But whether the lessee will be liable to an action on the
lease to collect the rent during the time he was in the enjoyment of said
property, is a question asked by Marcellus; just as he would have been
compelled to pay, if he had leased the services of a slave subject to an
usufruct, or a lodging. He states that the better opinion is that he will be
liable; and this is perfectly just.
He also asks if the lessee should incur any expense on account of the land
through the expectation of enjoying it for five years, whether he
can recover the same. He says that he cannot do so, because he should have
foreseen that this would take place. But what if the usufructuary had not
leased the land to him as such, but as the owner of the same? He will certainly
be liable, for he deceived the lessee; and this the Emperors Antoninus and
Severus stated in a Rescript. They also stated that, where the house has been
destroyed by fire, the rent must be paid for the time that the building stood.
(2) Julianus says in the Fifteenth Book of the Digest, that, where anyone
leases land on the condition that if anything should happen to it through the
exertion of irresistible force, he will be responsible for the same; he must
abide by the contract.
(3) Where, in the terms of a lease of land, the lessee was notified to be
careful about fire, and some accident caused a conflagration, he will not be
compelled to make good the loss. But where damage is caused by the negligence
of the lessee, for which he was responsible, he will be liable.
(4) The Emperor Antoninus, together with his father, stated in a Rescript with
reference to a flock of goats, which a party had hired, and which had been
stolen from him, "If it can be proved that the robbers drove away the goats
without any fraud on your part, you will not be compelled to be responsible for
the occurrence in an action on lease, and you can recover any rent for the time
following the theft as being money paid which was not due."
(5) Celsus also states in the Eighth Book of the Digest that want of skill
should be classed with negligence. Where a party rents calves to be fed, or
cloth to be repaired, or an article to be polished, he must be responsible for
negligence, and whatever fault he commits through want of skill is negligence,
because he rents the property in the character of an artisan.
(6) If you lease me a house belonging to another, which has been bequeathed or
given to me, I am not liable to you for the rent in an action on lease. Let us
see, however, whether anything is due for the time which has elapsed before the
bequest was made. I think that the rent should be paid for that time.
10. Julianus, On Urseius Ferox, Book III.
And I can properly bring an action on hiring, or for the purpose of compelling
you to release me from the contract.
11. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXII,
Let us see whether the tenant is liable for the negligence of his slave, and of
those to whom he has sublet the property, and also to what extent he is
responsible; shall he surrender the slave by way of reparation, or will he be
liable in his own name; and, with reference to those to whom he has sublet the
premises, must he only assign to the owner any rights of action which he may
have against them, or will he be accountable just as if the negligence was his
own? It is my opinion that he is responsible in his own name for the negligence
of his sub-tenants, even though nothing had been agreed upon with ref-
erence to this: provided, however, he committed negligence in subletting the
property to such persons, either his own slaves or tenants. Pomponius approves
this in the Sixty-third Book On the Edict.
(1) If it was agreed upon at the time of the lease that the tenant could not
have fire, and he, nevertheless, has it, he will be liable, even though an
accident may cause a conflagration, because he had no right to have it.
The rule is different where he is permitted to have fire which will not cause
injury, for, in this instance, he is allowed to have it provided it causes no
damage.
(2) The lessee must also be careful not to injure the property, or any right
attaching to the same, nor to permit this to be done.
(3) Where a party hired his services for the transportation of wine from
Campania, and then, a controversy having arisen between himself and another, he
sealed the casks with his own seal and that of the other person, and placed the
wine in a warehouse; he will be liable to an action on hiring to return the
possession of the wine to his employer, without any dispute, unless the
employee was guilty of negligence.
(4) It was agreed upon between a lessor and a lessee that hay should not be
placed in a building in a city. It was, nevertheless, placed there, and a
slave, having afterwards set fire to the hay, killed himself. Labeo says that
the lessee is liable to an action, because he himself was the cause of the
disaster, by bringing in the hay in violation of the terms of the lease.
12. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book II.
Moreover, even if some stranger had kindled the fire, the lessee would be
liable for the damage caused.
13. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.
The question is also asked, where the driver of a vehicle, while trying to pass
others, overturns one, and injures or kills a slave, what course must be
pursued? I think that an action on hiring will lie against him, for he should
have been more careful. Moreover, a prौtorian action under the Lex Aquilia will
be granted him.
(1) If the master of a ship should receive a cargo to be taken to Minturnौ,
and, as his ship was unable to ascend the river, he should transfer the
merchandise to another which was lost at the mouth of the river; in this
instance, the first master will be liable.
Labeo says that if he was not guilty of negligence, he will not be liable; but
if he acted against the consent of the owner, or transferred the cargo at a
time when he should not have done so, or loaded it in a vessel which was less
seaworthy than his own; an action on hiring can be brought against him.
(2) Where the master of a ship takes it into a river without a pilot, and, a
storm having arisen, he cannot manage the ship and loses it; the owners of the
cargo will be entitled to an action on hiring against him.
(3) If anyone leases a slave for the purpose of instructing him, and takes him
to a foreign country where he is either captured by the enemy, or loses his
life, it is held that an action on hiring will lie, provided he did not hire
him for the purpose of taking him into a foreign country.
(4) Julianus also says in the Eighty-sixth Book of the Digest that if a
shoemaker, being dissatisfied with a boy employed by him should strike him on
the neck with a last so hard as to destroy his eye, an action on hiring can be
brought by his father; for although masters are permitted to inflict light
punishment, still, this is immoderate. We have stated above that an action
under the Lex Aquilia will also lie.
Julianus denies that an action on injury can be brought, because the party did
not commit the act for the purpose of causing injury, but in the course of
instruction.
(5) Where a precious stone has been given to an artisan for the purpose of
being set or engraved, and it is broken; if this was caused by any defect in
the stone, an action on hiring will not lie, but where it occurred through want
of skill, it can be brought. It must be added to this opinion, "unless the
workman assumed the risk," for then, even if the accident was caused by a
defect, an action on hiring will lie.
(6) If a fuller should receive clothing to be cleaned, and mice gnaw it, he
will be liable to an action on hiring, because he ought to have provided
against this. If a fuller changes cloaks, and gives one to one person which
belongs to another, he will be liable to an action on hiring, even though he
did so ignorantly.
(7) A tenant left the premises on the approach of an army, and the soldiers
afterwards removed the windows and other things from the house; if the tenant
did not notify the owner when he left, he will be liable to an action on
hiring. Labeo says that if he could have resisted, and did not do so, he will
be liable; and this opinion is true. But if he could not notify the landlord, I
do not think he would be liable.
(8) Where anyone rents measures, and a magistrate orders them to be destroyed;
if they were false, Sabinus makes a distinction where the lessee was aware of
the fact, and where he was not. If he knew that they were false, an action on
hiring will lie, otherwise not. If the measures were correct, he will only be
liable where he was to blame for the act of the AEdile. This opinion is also
held by Labeo and Mela.
(9) Two lessees can be held liable for the entire amount involved.
(10) Where it is included in the contract for the hire of labor, that if the
article is not completed by a certain time it may be given to someone else, the
first lessee will not be liable to an action on hiring unless the article is
given to someone else under the same contract; nor can this be done until the
day fixed for its completion shall have passed.
(11) Where, after the term of his lease has elapsed, the tenant remains on the
premises, not only is a renewal of the lease held to have been made, but also
any pledges which have been given as security are still considered to be
encumbered. This, however, is only true where another party had not encumbered
the property at the time of
the original lease, otherwise his fresh consent will be necessary. The same
rule applies where lands have been leased to the government.
What we have stated, namely, that the tenant is held to have made a new lease
through the silence of both parties, must be understood to mean that where they
were silent, the lease is renewed for a year, but this does not apply to
ensuing years, even though the term of the lease should, in the beginning, have
been five years.
Moreover, if no contrary agreement was made during the second year after the
end of the term of five years, the lease will be considered to be renewed for
that year, as the parties are held to have consented for the year during which
they kept silent. This rule must also be observed afterwards for every ensuing
year. Another rule is applicable to urban estates, however, for a tenant is
liable for all the time he occupies the premises, unless a certain term fixing
the duration of the lease is mentioned in the written instrument.
14. The Same, On the Edict, Book LXXI.
Where anyone rents land for a certain time, he remains a tenant even after it
has expired; for it is understood that where an owner allows a tenant to remain
on the land he leases it to him again. A contract of this kind does not require
either words, or writing to establish it, but it becomes valid by mere consent.
Therefore, if the owner of the property should become insane or die in the
meantime, Marcellus states that it cannot be held that the lease is renewed;
and this is correct.


15. The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXII.
The action on hiring is granted to the lessee.

(1) Moreover, the action will, to a certain extent, lie in the following cases;
for instance, where the party is unable to enjoy the property which he has
leased, perhaps because possession of an entire field or of a portion of the
same has not been given him; or a house, or a stable, or the place where flocks
must be kept, has not been repaired; or where something is not furnished which
was agreed upon under the terms of the lease; an action on hiring will lie.

(2) Let us consider whether the lessor is obliged to do anything for the
lessee, where bad weather has caused the latter loss. Servius says that the
lessor must indemnify the lessee for any violence which could not be resisted;
as, for instance, that caused by the overflow of rivers, by birds of different
kinds, or by any similar accident, or where an invasion of enemies takes place.
If any defect should arise with reference to the property itself, the loss must
be borne by the tenant; as, for example, where wine becomes sour, or the crops
are ruined by weeds. If, however, an earthquake occurs, and destroys all the
crops, the loss will not be sustained by the tenant, for he cannot be compelled
to pay the rent of land in addition to the loss of the seed.
Where, however, the olive crop has been spoiled by fire, or this has taken
place through the unusual heat of the sun, the owner of the land must bear the
loss; but if nothing extraordinary happens,
the tenant will be responsible for it. The same must be said where an army that
was passing by removed anything in mere wantonness. But if a field should be so
ruined by an earthquake that nothing remains of it, the loss must be borne by
the owner, for he is obliged to furnish the land to the lessee in such a
condition that he can enjoy it.

(3) Where a tenant alleged that a fire had taken place on the land, and asked
that the rent be remitted; it was stated in a Rescript, "If you cultivated the
land, you are entitled to reasonable relief on account of the occurrence of an
unexpected fire."

(4) Papinianus says in the Fourth Book of Opinions that where a landlord has
remitted the rent to a tenant for one year on account of sterility, and there
was a great yield during the following year, the landlord has lost nothing on
account of remitting the rent, and he can even claim the rent for the year
which he remitted. He gave the same opinion with reference to the loss under a
perpetual lease. If, however, the landlord remitted the rent for a year on
account of sterility, as a gift, the same rule will apply, as this is rather an
agreement than a donation. But what if he remitted the rent because of
sterility during the last year of the lease? It is held to be more correct
that, if the preceding years were fruitful, and the landlord was aware of the
fact, he should not call the tenant to account for the one which was sterile.

(5) It is stated in a Rescript of the Divine Antoninus that no attention should
be paid to a tenant who complains of the smallness of the crops. It is also
stated in another rescript, "You are claiming something unusual, when you ask
that the rent shall be remitted to you on account of the age of the vines."

(6) Again, where a certain individual, in the case of the loss of a vessel,
demanded what he had paid for transportation on the ground that it was a loan;
it was stated in a Rescript by the Emperor Antoninus that the Imperial
Procurator had not improperly demanded the freight from the owner of the
vessel, since he had not performed his duty in transporting the property. This
rule must likewise be observed in the case of all other persons.

(7) Wherever there is any ground for the remission of rent for the above-
mentioned reasons, the lessee cannot recover any interest to which he may be
entitled, but he will be released from the payment of rent in proportion to the
time. Finally, it has been already stated that the loss of the seed must be
borne by the tenant.

(8) It is clear that if the owner of the property does not allow the lessee to
enjoy it, either because he himself has leased it, or for the reason that
someone has leased the property of another acting as his agent, or as if it was
his own, he must indemnify the lessee to the extent of his interest. Proculus
held this opinion where a party pretended to be an agent.

(9) Julianus says in the Fifteenth Book of the Digest that sometimes an action
on hiring is brought for the purpose of releasing the parties to the contract;
as, for instance, where I leased land to Titius, and he died after appointing a
ward his heir, and, as the guardian had
caused the ward to reject the inheritance, I leased the said land to another
party at a higher rent; and afterwards the ward obtained possession of the
estate of his father. In an action on hiring, he can recover nothing more than
to be discharged from liability on his contract, for I had a good reason for
again leasing the property:



16. Julianus, Digest, Book XV.
Since, at the time, no right of action was granted me against the ward.
17. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.
He also says that the ward is entitled to an action against his guardian, if he
ought not to have rejected the estate.
18. Julianus, Digest, Book XV.
There will also be included in this action any profits which the ward could
have obtained from the lease of the land.
19. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.
But you should add to the opinion of Julianus that if I was in collusion with
the guardian I would be liable to an action on hiring to the extent of the
interest of the ward.
(1) Where anyone rents defective casks, not knowing that they are such, and the
wine afterwards leaks out, he will be liable to the amount of the party's
interest, and his ignorance will not be excusable. This opinion was held by
Cassius.
The case is different if you rented a tract of land for pasturage in which
poisonous herbs grew; for, in this instance, if any of the cattle died, or were
depreciated in value, and you knew of the existence of the herbs, you must
indemnify the lessee to the amount of his interest; and if you were ignorant of
their existence, you cannot collect the rent. This was also held by Servius,
Labeo, and Sabinus.
(2) We must consider where anyone leases a tract of land what implements he
must furnish the lessee, and if he does not do this, whether he will be liable
in an action on lease. A letter of Neratius to Aristo upon this point is extant
which states that casks must be furnished the tenant, as well as a wine-press
and an olive-press, equipped with ropes, and if they are lacking, the owner
must provide them, and he must likewise repair a press if it is out of order.
If any of the implements become damaged through the fault of the tenant, he
will be liable to an action on lease.
Neratius says that the tenant is also required to provide the vessels which we
use for pressing the olives. If the oil is pressed out by means of baskets, the
owner must furnish the press, the windlass, the baskets, the wheel, and the
pulleys by which the press is raised. He must also furnish the brazen kettle in
which the oil is washed with warm water, as well as the other necessary
utensils for handling the oil, together With the wine-casks, which the tenant
must cover with pitch for present
use. All these things shall be provided in this manner, unless some other
special agreement has been made.
(3) Where the landlord inserted in the lease that he should be entitled to a
specified amount of grain at a certain price, and he refuses to accept it, and
is unwilling to make any deduction from the rent, he can bring an action to
recover the entire amount; but the result will be that, in the discharge of his
duty, the judge must take into account the interest which the lessee had in
delivering the grain, rather than in paying money by way of rent. The same must
likewise be held where an action on the lease is brought.
(4) What action will lie where a tenant adds a door or anything else to a
house? The better opinion is that held by Labeo, namely, that an action on
lease will lie to permit the tenant to remove it; provided, however, that he
gives security against threatened injury, lest he may render the house of less
value in some respect when he removes what he added, but only that he will
restore the building to its original condition.
(5) If a tenant should bring a metal chest into a house, and the owner
subsequently makes the entrance smaller; it is a fact that an action on lease,
as well as one for the production of property will lie against the owner,
whether he was aware or ignorant of the fact. It is the duty of the judge to
compel him to furnish a passage to enable the tenant to remove the chest, of
course at the expense of the landlord.
(6) If anyone should lease a house for a year, and pay the rent for the entire
term, and, six months afterwards, the house falls down, or is consumed by fire;
Mela very properly says that he will be entitled to an action on lease for the
recovery of the rent for the remaining time, but not to one for the recovery of
money which was not due; for he did not pay more by mistake, but that he might
be benefited with reference to the lease.
The case is different where anyone leases property for ten aureiand pays
fifteen; for if he paid this sum by mistake, being under the impression that he
had rented the property for fifteen aurei, he will not be entitled to an action
on lease, but can only sue for the recovery of the money; for there is a great
deal of difference between one who pays by mistake, and one who pays the entire
rent in advance.
(7) Where anyone makes a contract for the transportation of a woman by sea, and
afterwards a child is born to her on the ship, it has been established that
nothing is due on account of the child; for the transportation was not more
expensive, nor did the child consume anything which was provided for the use of
those navigating the vessel.
(8) It is clear that an action on hiring can also pass to an heir.
(9) Where a certain copyist leased his services and the party who had
contracted for them died; the Emperors Antoninus and Severus stated the
following in a Rescript, in answer to an application of the copyist: "Since, as
you allege that you are not to blame for not having furnished the services for
which you were hired to Antoninus Aquilia, it is only just that, if you did not
receive any salary from another during the year, the contract should be carried
out."
(10) Papinianus states in the Fourth Book of Opinions that, where an envoy of
the Emperor dies, his attendants must be paid their salaries for the remainder
of their time of service; provided the said attendants were not, during that
time, in the employ of others.
20. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXIV.
A lease, like a sale, can be made under a condition.
(1) It cannot, however, be contracted by way of donation.
(2) Sometimes the lessor is not bound, but the lessee is; as, for instance,
where the buyer rents a tract of land until he pays the purchase-money.
21. Javolenus, Epistles, Book XL
When I sold a tract of land, the agreement was that, until the entire amount
was paid, the purchaser should lease it for a certain rent. When the money is
paid, should a receipt be given for the rent? The answer was that good faith
requires that what was agreed upon should be done, but that the purchaser
should not be responsible to the vendor for a larger sum than the rent of the
property would amount to during the time when the money was not paid.
22. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXIV.
Moreover, where it is inserted in the contract that if the price is not paid,
the property shall not be purchased, an action on lease will lie.
(1) As often as any work is given to be performed, it is a lease.
(2) Where I contract for the construction of a house, with the understanding
that the person I employ is to be responsible for all of the expense, he
transfers to me the ownership of all the material used, and still the
transaction is a lease; for the artisan leases me his services, that is to say,
the necessity for performing the labor.
(3) Just as in a transaction of purchase and sale it is naturally conceded that
the parties can either purchase or buy something more or less, and hence
mutually restrain one another, so the rule is the same in leasing and hiring.
23. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book II.
And, therefore, a contract of lease when once made cannot be rescinded under
the pretext that the compensation was too low, where no fraud by the opposite
party can be proved.
24. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXIV.
Where it is included in the contract of lease that the work shall be approved
by the owner, it is considered that this means in accordance with the judgment
of a good citizen. The same rule is observed where recourse is to be had to the
judgment of any other person whomsoever; for good faith demands that such
judgment should be afforded as befits a good citizen. Judgment of this kind has
reference to the quality of the work, and not to the extension of the time
prescribed by the contract, unless this itself was included in the agreement.
The result of
which is that where the approval of the work has been obtained by the fraud of
the party employed, it is of no effect, and an action on lease can be brought.
(1) Where a tenant rents a tract of land, the property of a subtenant is not
bound to the owner, but the crops remain in the condition of a pledge, just as
if the first tenant had gathered them.
(2) Where a house or a tract of land is rented for the term of five years, the
owner can at once bring an action against the tenant, if he abandons the
cultivation of the soil, or vacates the house.
(3) He can, also, bring suit with reference to those things which the tenant
ought to do without delay; as, for instance, some labor which he should
perform, like the planting of trees.
(4) Where a tenant is unable to enjoy the property, he can legally bring an
action at once for his entire term of five years, although the owner may have
allowed him to enjoy it for the remaining years, as the owner will not always
be released for the reason that he permitted the tenant to enjoy the property
for the second or third year. For where the tenant has been ejected under the
lease, and has betaken himself to another farm, he will not be able to
cultivate both, nor will he be compelled to pay the rent, and he can recover
the amount of the profit which he would have obtained if he had been
unmolested; for permission to enjoy the property comes too late where it is
offered at a time when the tenant, being occupied with other matters, cannot
take advantage of it.
If the landlord prevents his enjoyment of the property, and then changes his
mind, the affairs of the tenant are held to be unaltered; and the delay of a
few days does not lessen the obligation to any extent. Again, a party can
properly bring an action on lease, to whom certain articles have not been
furnished in accordance with the agreement, or where he is prevented by the
owner from enjoying the property, or where this is done by a stranger whom the
owner can control.
(5) If a landlord rents a tract of land for several years, and charges his heir
by his will to release the tenant, and the heir does not permit the latter to
enjoy the property for the remainder of his term, an action on lease will lie.
If he allows him to do so, but does not remit the rent, he will be liable to an
action under the will.
25. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book X.
Where rent has been promised in general terms, to be decided by a third party,
a lease is not held to have been made. But where it is stated that the amount
of the rent shall be estimated by Titius, the lease will be valid subject to
this condition; and if the party mentioned fixes the rent, it must, by all
means, be paid in accordance with his estimate, and the lease will become
operative. If, however, he refuses to do this, or is unable to fix the rent,
the lease will be of no effect, just as if the amount of the rent had not been
determined.
(1) Where a man has leased anyone a tract of land to be cultivated, or a house
to be occupied, and, for some reason or other, he sells the
land or the house, he must see that the purchaser permits the tenant to enjoy
the land or occupy the house, in accordance with the terms of the same
contract; otherwise, if he is prevented from doing so, he can bring an action
on lease against the vendor.
(2) Where a neighbor, in building a house, cuts off the light from a room, the
landlord will be liable to the tenant. There is certainly no doubt that the
tenant can give up the lease in a case of this kind; and also, where an action
is brought against him for the rent, compensation must be taken into account.
We understand that the same rule applies where the landlord does not repair any
doors or windows which may have been damaged or
destroyed.
(3) The lessee should do everything in accordance with the terms of the lease,
and, above all things, he should be careful to perform the labors on the farm
at the proper time, lest cultivation out of season cause the soil to be
deteriorated. He should also take care of the buildings in order to prevent
them from being damaged.
(4) He will also be considered to be to blame if his neighbor, through enmity,
cuts down the trees.
(5) If he himself cuts them down, he will not only be liable to an action on
lease, but also to those under the Lex Aquilia and the Law of the Twelve Tables
with reference to cutting trees by stealth, and to the interdict based on a
violent or clandestine act.
It is, undoubtedly, a part of the duty of the judge who hears the case on
lease, to see that the lessor abandons the other actions.
(6) Superior force, which the Greeks call "Divine Power," should not cause any
loss to the tenant where the crops are injured in an unusual degree, otherwise,
he must endure any moderate damage with untroubled mind, where he is not
deprived of any extraordinary profit. It is evident, however, that we are
speaking of a tenant who pays his rent in cash; on the other hand, where he
divides the crops, as in the case of a partnership, he must also share the loss
and gain with the owner of the land.
(7) Where anyone takes charge of the transportation of a column, and it is
broken when it is raised, or while it is being carried, or when it is unloaded,
he will be responsible for the damage, where this happened through his fault,
or that of any of the workmen whom he employs. He will not be to blame,
however, if all precautions are taken which a very diligent and careful man
should take.
We, of course, understand that the same rule applies where anyone agrees to
transport casks or lumber, as well as other things which are to be conveyed
from one place to another.
(8) If a fuller or a tailor should lose clothing, and satisfy the owner of the
same, the latter must assign to him his rights of action to recover the
property.
26. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book II.
Where anyone has hired his services to two employers at the same time, he must
satisfy the one who has first employed him.
27. Alfenus, Digest, Book II.
It is not always necessary to make a deduction from the rent in the case where
tenants have been put to a little inconvenience, with reference to a part of
their lodgings; for the tenant is in such a position that if anything should
fall on the building, and by reason of this the owner be compelled to demolish
a portion of the same, he ought to bear the slight inconvenience resulting
therefrom; but, in doing so, the owner must not open that part of the house of
which the tenant is accustomed to make the most use.
(1) Again, the question is asked, if a tenant should leave on account of fear,
will he be obliged to pay the rent, or not? The answer is that, if he had good
reason to be afraid, even though there was not actually any danger, he will not
owe the rent; but if there was no just cause for fear, it will still be due.
28. Labeo, Later Epitomes by Javolenus, Book IV.
Where, however, the tenant still makes use of the house, he must pay the rent.
(1) Labeo thinks that the rent is due, even if the house is out of repair.
(2) The same rule of law applies where the tenant has the power to lease the
house and pay the rent. If, however, the landlord does not give the tenant
authority to rent the house in which he lives, and he, nevertheless, does rent
it, Labeo thinks that he must indemnify him for all that he has paid without
fraudulent intent. But if the tenant was occupying the house gratuitously, a
deduction should be made in proportion to the unexpired time of the lease.
29. Alfenus, Digest, Book VII.
The following was inserted in the contract of a lease: "The lessee shall
neither cut down trees, nor girdle nor burn them, nor permit anyone to girdle,
cut down, or burn the same."
The question arose whether the lessee should prevent anyone whom he saw doing
something of this kind, or whether he should keep such a watch upon the trees
that no one could do this. I answered that the word "permit" includes both
significations, but that the lessor seemed to have intended that the lessee
should not only prevent anyone whom he saw cutting down trees, but should also
be careful and take such precautions that no one could cut them down.
30. The Same, Digest of Epitomes by Paulus, Book III.
A man who rented a house for thirty aurei, sub-let the separate rooms on such
terms that he collected forty for all of them. The owner of the building
demolished it, because he said that it was about to fall down. The question
arose what the amount of damages should be, and whether the party who rented
the entire house could bring an action on lease. The answer was that if the
building was in such a bad condition that it was necessary to tear it down, an
estimate should be made, and the damages assessed in proportion to the amount
for which the owner
had leased the premises, and that the time when the tenants were unable to
occupy them should also be taken into consideration. If, however, it was not
necessary to demolish the house, but the owner did so because he wished to
build a better one, the judgment must be for the amount of the interest which
the tenant had in his sub-tenants not being compelled to leave the premises.
(1) An AEdile rented baths in a certain town for the term of a year, in order
that they might be used gratuitously by the citizens. The baths having been
destroyed by fire after three months, it was held that an action on lease could
be brought against the proprietor of the baths, that a part of the price should
be refunded in proportion to the time during which the baths were not
available.
(2) Inquiry was made as to the action to be brought where a man hired mules to
be loaded with a certain weight, and he who hired them injured them with
heavier loads. The answer was that the owner could legally proceed either under
the Lex Aquilia or in an action on lease, but that, under the Lex Aquilia, he
could only sue the party who had driven the mules at the time; but, by an
action on lease, he could properly proceed against him who hired them, even if
someone else had injured them.
(3) A man who contracted for the building of a house stated in the agreement:
"I will furnish the stone necessary for the work, and the owner shall pay to
the contractor seven sesterces for each foot, and as much for the stone as for
the labor." The question arose whether the work must be measured before, or
after it was completed. The answer was that it should be measured while it was
still unfinished.
(4) A tenant received a house under the condition that he would return it
uninjured, except so far as damage might result through violence or age. A
slave of the tenant burnt the house, but not accidentally. The opinion was
given that this kind of violence would not appear to have been excepted; and
that it was not agreed that the tenant should not be responsible if a slave
burnt it, but that both the parties intended that violence exerted by strangers
should be excepted.
31. The Same, Epitomes of the Digest by Paulus, Book V.
Several persons loaded the ship of Saufeius with grain without separating it;
Saufeius delivered to one of them his grain out of the common heap, and the
vessel was afterwards lost. The question arose whether the others could bring
an action against the master of the ship with reference to their share of the
grain on the ground that he had diverted the cargo. The answer was that there
are two kinds of leases of property, one of them where the article must itself
be returned, as where clothing is entrusted to a fuller to be cleaned, or where
something of the same kind must be given back; as, for instance, where a mass
of silver is given to a workman to be made into vases, or gold is given to be
made into rings. In the first instance, the property still belongs to the
owner; in the second, he becomes the creditor for its value.
The same rule of law applies to deposits, for where a party has deposited a sum
of money without having enclosed it in anything, or sealed it up, but simply
after counting it, the party with whom it is left is not bound to do anything
but repay the same amount of money. In accordance with this, the grain seems to
have become the property of Saufeius, and he very properly gave up a portion of
it. If, however, the grain of each of the parties had been separately enclosed
by means of boards, or in sacks, or in casks, so that what belonged to each
could be distinguished, it could not be changed; for then the owner of the
wheat which the master of the ship had delivered could bring an action for its
recovery, and, therefore, the authorities do not approve of actions on the
ground of the diversion of the cargo in this case, because the merchandise
which was delivered to the master was either all of the same kind and at once
became his, and the owner became his creditor (for it is not held that there
was a diversion of the cargo since it became the property of the master); or
the identical article which was delivered must be restored, and in this
instance, an action for theft would lie against the master, and hence an action
on the ground of the diversion of the cargo would be superfluous.
Where, however, the merchandise was delivered with the understanding that the
same kind should be returned, the party receiving it would only be liable for
negligence, as liability for negligence exists where the contract is made for
the benefit of both parties, and no negligence can exist where the master
returned to one of the owners a portion of the grain, since it was necessary
for him to deliver his share to one of them before the others, even though he
would be in a better condition than the others by his doing so.
32. Julianus, On Minicius, Book IV.
A man who leased a tract of land to be cultivated for a term of several years
died, and devised the said land. Cassius denied that the tenant could be
compelled to cultivate the land, because the heir had no interest in it. If,
however, the tenant desired to cultivate it, and was prevented from doing so by
the party to whom the land had been left, he would be entitled to an action
against the heir, and the loss must be borne by the heir; just as where anyone
sells something and bequeaths it to another before he delivers it; for, in this
instance, the heir will be liable both to the purchaser and to the legatee.
33. Africanus, Questions, Book VIII.
Where a tract of land which you have leased to me is confiscated, you will be
liable to an action on lease to permit me to enjoy it, even though it is not
your fault that I cannot do so; just as it is held if you contract for the
building of a house, and the ground on which it is to be erected is destroyed,
you will, nevertheless, be liable. For if you should sell me a tract of land,
and it should be confiscated before delivery, you will be liable to an action
on purchase; and this is true to the extent that you must return the price, and
not that you will be
obliged to indemnify me for anything more than my interest in having the vacant
tract of land delivered to me.
Hence, I think that the rule also applies to a lease, so that you must return
the rent that I have paid for the time I was not able to enjoy the property,
but you cannot be compelled to do this by any other action on lease; for if
your tenant is prevented from enjoying the land either by you, or by another
party whom you have the power to hinder from doing so, you must indemnify him
to the extent of his interest in enjoying the property, and in this his profit
is also included. If, however, he is hindered by anyone whom you cannot
control, on account of his superior force or authority, you will not be liable
to him for anything but to release the rent which has not been paid, or to
refund that which has been paid.
34. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book X.
Just as if this had happened through an attack of robbers.
35. Africanus, Questions, Book VIII.
This distinction corresponds to that which was introduced by Servius, and has
been approved by almost all authorities; that is to say, where a landlord
prevents a tenant from enjoying the use of the house by making repairs upon it,
it must be considered whether or not the house was demolished through
necessity; for what difference would it make whether the lessor of a building
is compelled to repair it on account of its age, or where the lessor of land is
compelled to endure injury from a party whom he cannot prevent from inflicting
it?
It must be understood, however, that we make use of this distinction with
reference to a person who has leased his land to be enjoyed, and has transacted
the business in good faith; and not to one who has fraudulently leased land
belonging to another and is unable to resist the owner of the same, when he
prevents the tenant from enjoying it.
(1) When we hold land in common, and it is agreed upon between us that we shall
have the renting of the same during alternate years for a certain amount, and
you, when your year has expired, purposely destroy the crop of the ensuing
year, I can proceed against you by means of two actions, one based on
ownership, and the other on the ground of a lease; for my share is involved in
the action on ownership, and yours only in the action on lease. Then, it is
asked, will it not be the fact that, so far as my share is concerned, the loss
sustained by me on your account must be made good by means of an action in
partition? This opinion is correct, but, nevertheless, I think that that of
Servius is also true, namely: "That where I make use of either one of the
above-named actions the other will be destroyed." This question we may ask more
simply, if it is suggested that, where it has been agreed upon between two
parties who have separate tracts of land belonging to them, each shall have a
right to lease the land of the other, with the understanding that the crops
shall be delivered by way of rent.
36. Florentinus, Institutes, Book VII.
Where work is to be done under a contract, it is at the risk of the contractor
until it is accepted. But, indeed, if it has been contracted for to be paid by
feet or measure, it will be at the risk of the contractor, until it is
measured; and in both instances the risk must be borne by the employer if he
was to blame for the work not being accepted or measured. If, however, the work
should be destroyed by superior force, before being accepted, it will be at the
risk of the employer, unless some other agreement has been made. The contractor
is not obliged to be responsible to the employer for anything more than he
could have accomplished by his care and labor.
37. Javolenus, On Cassius, Book VIII.
If a work is destroyed by superior force before it has been accepted by the
employer, he must bear the loss, if the work was of such a character that he
should have accepted it.
38. Paulus, Rules.
A man who has hired his services is entitled to compensation for the entire
time for which he was employed, if he was not to blame for failing to do the
work.
(1) Advocates, also, are not compelled to return their fees, if they are not to
blame for not trying a case.
39. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book II.
A lease does not usually change the ownership of property.
40. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book V.
He who receives compensation for the safe-keeping of any property is
responsible for the custody of the same.
41. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Boole V.
Julianus, however, says that an action cannot be brought against one person for
an injury committed by another; for by what degree of care can he prevent
unlawful damage from being caused by someone else? Marcellus, however, says
that this can sometimes be done where the party could have taken such care of
the property that it could not have been injured, or where he himself, having
charge of it, committed the damage. This opinion of Marcellus should be
approved.
42. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XIII.
If you steal a slave that has been leased to you, one of two actions is
available against you: the action on lease, and the one for theft.
43. The Same, On the Edict, Book XXI.
If you wound a slave that has been leased to you, the action under the Lex
Aquilia or the one on lease can be brought on account of the wound, but the
plaintiff must be content with one or the other of these; and this is a part of
the duty of the judge before whom proceedings based on the lease are
instituted.
44. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book VII. No one can lease a servitude.1
45. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXII.
If I lease you a house and my slaves cause you any damage, or commit a theft, I
am not liable to you on the lease, but in a noxal action.
(1) If I lease you a slave to be employed in your shop, and he commits a theft,
it may be doubted whether an action on hiring will be sufficient in this
instance; for it is far from being in accordance with the good faith implied by
the contract that you should suffer any loss on account of the property which
you have hired; or should it be stated that, in addition to the right of action
based on the hiring, there is also one on the ground of the crime of theft, and
that this offence gives rise to a peculiar right of action of its own? This is
the better opinion.
46. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXIX.
Where anyone leases property for a coin of trifling value the lease is void,
for this resembles a donation.
47. Marcellus, Digest, Book VI.
When it is ascertained that a purchaser or a lessee has sold or leased the
property to several other parties, in such a way that each of them is
responsible for the entire amount, they can only be compelled to pay their
shares where it is established that they are all solvent; although, perhaps, it
would be more just that, even where they are all solvent, the claimant should
not be deprived of the right of suing any one of them that he wishes, if he
does not refuse to assign the rights of action which he has against the others.
48. The Same, Digest, Book VIII.
If I contract with anyone to perform some labor which I myself have agreed to
do, it is settled that I will be entitled to an action on lease against him.
(1) Where a party refuses to restore to me a slave, or any other movable
property which I have leased to him, judgment shall be rendered against him for
the amount of damages sworn to by me in court.
49. Modestinus, Excuses, Book VI.
Where guardians or curators have been appointed, they are forbidden to rent any
property belonging to the Emperor before they have rendered their accounts. And
if anyone, concealing the fact, should
1 This is also the rule with reference to easements, which, being permanent
privileges attached to the soil, and transferable only by grant either express,
implied, or necessarily presumed, are not susceptible of lease, which
presupposes compensation of some kind. He who can use an easement, like the
possession of the dominant tenement at Civil Law, has no right to any of the
rents or profits of the land upon which it is imposed. Easements, as well as
servitudes, are constant, and do not change with the ownership of the property
entitled or subject to them. --- ED.
appear for the purpose of renting lands belonging to the Emperor, he shall be
punished as a forger. This decision the Emperor Severus also sanctioned.
(1) As a result of this, persons who are administering a guardianship or a
curatorship are forbidden to rent anything from the Treasury.
50. The Same, Pandects, Book X.
Where anyone ignorantly leases property to a soldier, believing him to be a
civilian, it is settled that he can collect the rent from him, for since he was
not aware that he was a soldier, he is not guilty of violation of military
discipline.
51. Javolenus, Epistles, Book XL
I leased a tract of land under the condition that, if it was not cultivated in
compliance with the terms of the lease, I should have the right to lease it
again to another, and that the tenant should indemnify me for any loss which I
might sustain. In this instance, it was not agreed that, if I rented the land
for more money, the excess should be paid to you; and, as no one was
cultivating the land, I, nevertheless, leased it for more. I ask whether I
should give the amount of the excess to the first lessee. The answer was that,
in obligations of this kind, we should pay particular attention to what was
agreed upon between the parties. It is held, however, that in this instance, it
was tacitly agreed that nothing should be paid if the land was rented for more
money; that is to say, this provision was inserted in the agreement only for
the benefit of the lessor.
(1) I hired work to be done under the condition of paying a certain amount
every day for said work to the party employed. The work being badly done, can I
bring an action against him on the lease? The answer was, if you hired this
work to be done on condition that the party employed to do it should be liable
to you for its being properly performed, even though it was agreed upon that a
certain sum of money should be paid for each piece of work, the contractor will
still be responsible to you if the work was badly done. For, indeed, it makes
no difference whether the work is performed for one price, or whether payment
is made for each portion of the same, provided the whole of it must be
performed by the contractor. Therefore, an action on lease can be brought
against him who performed the work badly, unless payment was arranged for
separate portions of it, so that it might be performed according to the
approval of the owner; for then the contractor is not considered to guarantee
to the owner the excellence of the entire work.
52. Pomponius, On Quintus Mucius, Book XXXI.
If I lease you a tract of land for ten aurei, and you think that I am leasing
it to you for five, the contract is void. If, however, I think that I am
leasing it to you for less, and you think that you are leasing it for more, the
lease will not be for a larger sum than I thought that it was.
53. Papinianus, Opinions, Book XI.
Where a surety appears for a tenant of public lands before an officer having
charge of the same, and which the said officer has leased to the tenant, he
will not be liable to the government; but the crops, in this instance, will
remain as a pledge.
54. Paulus, Opinions, Book V.
I ask whether a surety who appears for a lessee will also be liable for
interest on rent which has not been paid, or whether he can take advantage of
the constitutions by which it is provided that those who pay money for others
are only obliged to be responsible for the principal that is due.
Paulus answered that even if the surety bound himself for everything relating
to the lease, he also will be obliged to pay interest; just as the tenant is
compelled to do, where he is in default for the payment of the rent. For, in
contracts made in good faith, even though interest may not so much arise from
the obligation, as it is dependent upon the decision of the judge, still, where
the surety renders himself responsible for everything relating to the contract
of the lessee, it seems but just that he also should bear the burden of
interest, if he obligated himself as follows: "Do you bind yourself to the
amount of a judgment justly rendered?" Or in these words: "Do you promise to
indemnify me?"
(1) It was agreed by the lessor and the lessee of a tract of land that the
tenant, Seius, should not be ejected against his will during the term of the
lease, and if he was ejected, the lessor, Titius, should pay him a penalty of
ten aurei; or, if the lessee, Seius, should desire to withdraw during the term
of the lease, he should be compelled to pay ten aurei to the lessor, Titius,
and the parties reciprocally stipulated with reference to this. I ask, as the
lessee, Seius, did not pay the rent for two consecutive years, whether he could
be ejected without Titius fearing to incur the penalty. Paulus answered that
although nothing was stated in the penal stipulation with reference to the
payment of the rent, still, it is probable that it was agreed that the tenant
should not be ejected during the term of the lease, if he paid the rent, and
cultivated the land, as he should do; so that if he understood to bring suit
for the penalty, and had not paid the rent, the lessor could avail himself of
an exception on the ground of bad faith.
(2) Paulus gave it as his opinion that, where anyone assigns a slave to his
tenant after estimating his value, he will be at the risk of the tenant; and
therefore, if he should die, his value, as appraised, must be made good by the
heir of the tenant.
55. The Same, Sentences, Book II.
Where a granary has been broken into and plundered, the owner will not be
liable, unless he was charged with the safe-keeping of its contents. But the
slaves of the person with whom the contract was made can be demanded for the
purpose of being tortured, on account of the knowledge of the building which
they possess.
(1) Where a tract of land is leased and the lessee makes some addition to the
same, by means of his labor, which is either necessary or useful, or erects a
building, or makes some improvement which had not been agreed upon, he can
proceed by an action on lease against the owner of the property for the
recovery of the amount which he has expended.
(2) Where a lessee, contrary to the provisions of his lease, abandons the land
without just or reasonable cause before his term has expired, he can be sued in
an action on lease for the payment of the rent for the entire term, and for the
indemnification of the lessor to the extent of his interest.
56. The Same, On the Duties of the Prefect of the Night-Watch.Where the
proprietors of magazines and warehouses desire them
to be opened on account of the nonappearance of the lessees, and their failure
to pay the rent during the term of the lease, and wish to have an inventory of
the contents made by the public officials whose duty it is to do so, they shall
be heard. The time to be considered in cases of this kind should be two years.
57. Javolenus, On the Last Works of Labeo, Book IX.
A man who owned a house leased an empty space adjoining the same to his next
neighbor. The said neighbor, while building upon his own ground, threw the dirt
for the excavation upon the said vacant space, and heaped it up higher than the
stone foundation of the lessor; and the earth, having become wet by constant
rains, weakened the wall of the lessor with moisture to such an extent that the
building collapsed. Labeo says that only an action on lease will lie, because
it was not the heaping up of the earth itself, but the moisture arising
therefrom that subsequently caused the injury, but that an action on the ground
of unlawful damage will only lie where the damage has not been produced by some
outside cause. I approve this opinion.
58. Labeo, Later Epitomes by Javolenus, Book IV.
You leased an entire house for a gross sum, and then sold it under condition
that the rent of the tenants should belong to the purchaser. Even though the
lessee may have sub-let the said house for a larger amount, it, nevertheless,
will belong to the purchaser, because the lessee owed it to you.
(1) It was stated in a contract for labor that it should be performed before a
certain day, and then, if this was not done, the lessee should be liable to an
amount equal to the interest of the lessor. I think that this obligation is
contracted to the extent that a good citizen would fix the damages with
reference to the time; because the intention of the parties seems to have been
that the work should be completed within the time during which it could be
done.
A certain individual rented a bath in a town for forty drachmौa month, and it
was agreed that he should be furnished a hundred drachmas for the repair of the
furnace, the pipes, and other portions
of the bath, and the lessee demanded the hundred drachmौ. I think that they
were owing to him, if he gave security that the money would be expended for
repairs.
59. Javolenus, On the Lost Works of Labeo, Book V.
Marcius was employed to build a house by Flaccus. After the work was partly
done the building was destroyed by an earthquake. Massurius Sabinus says that
if the accident took place through some force of nature, as for instance, an
earthquake, Flaccus must assume the risk.
60. Labeo, Last Epitomes by Javolenus, Book V.
Where a house is rented for several years, the lessor must not only permit the
lessee to occupy it from the Kalends of July of each year, but also to sub-let
the same during the term of his lease, if he desires to do so. Therefore, if
the said house remains in a dilapidated condition from the Kalends of January
to the Kalends of July, so that no one can occupy it, and it cannot be shown to
anyone; the lessee will not be obliged to pay any rent to the lessor. Nor,
indeed, can he be compelled to occupy the house, if it has been repaired after
the Kalends of July, unless the lessor was ready to furnish him another house
suitable for his residence.
(1) I think that the heir of a lessee, even though he may not be a tenant,
will, nevertheless, hold possession for the owner of the property.
(2) If a fuller loses your clothing, and you have the means to recover it, but
do not wish to avail yourself of them; you can, nevertheless, bring an action
on lease against the fuller. The judge, however, must decide whether it will
not be better for you to bring an action against the thief and recover your
property from him; of course, at the expense of the fuller. But if he should
consider this to be impossible, he must then render judgment in your favor
against the fuller, and compel you to assign your rights of action to him.
(3) An agreement having been entered into, a house was contracted for under the
condition that it should be subject to the approval or disapproval of the
owner, or his heir. The contractor, with the consent of the other party, made
certain changes in the work. I have it as My opinion that the work did not seem
to have been performed in compliance with the terms of the contract, but since
the changes had been made with the consent of the owner, the contractor should
be released.
(4) I directed you to make an estimate of the amount you would ask to build a
house, and you answered me that you would build it for two hundred aurei. I
gave you the contract for a certain sum, and I afterwards ascertained that the
house could not be built for less than three hundred aurei. I had already paid
you a hundred, a part of which you had expended, and I then forbade you to
proceed with the work. I held that if you continued to do the work, I would be
entitled to an
action on lease against you, to compel you to refund to me the remainder of the
money.
(5) You remove a harvest, while the tenant is looking on, when you are aware
that it belongs to someone else. Labeo says that the owner can sue you for the
grain, and that the tenant has a right, under his lease, to bring an action
against the owner to compel him to do so.
(6) The lessor of a warehouse had posted upon it that he would not receive
deposits of gold, silver, or jewels at his own risk, and afterwards he,
knowingly, allowed articles of this kind to be left in said warehouse. Hence, I
stated that he would be liable to you just as if the clause in the notice had
been erased.
(7) You employed a slave of mine who was a muleteer, and you lost a mule
through his negligence. If he hired himself, I hold that I must make good the
damage to you on the ground of property employed for my benefit, but only to
the extent of the peculium of the slave. If, however, I myself leased him, I
will not be responsible to you for anything else than fraud and negligence. But
if you leased a muleteer from me without the designation of his person, and I
deliver to you the one by whose negligence the animal perished, I say that I
must be responsible to you for negligence, because I selected the slave who
caused you loss of this kind.
(8) You hired a vehicle to carry your baggage and make a journey, and when a
bridge was crossed, and the keeper demanded toll, the question arose whether
the driver should pay toll for his carriage alone. I think that, if he knew
when he hired his vehicle that he would cross the bridge, he should pay the
toll.
(9) I hold that the lessee of an entire warehouse should not be responsible to
the proprietor of the same for the custody of property, for which the
proprietor himself should be liable to those who rented of him, unless it was
otherwise agreed upon in the lease.
61. Scौvola, Digest, Book VII.
A tenant, although it was not included in the terms of his lease that he should
plant vines, nevertheless, did plant them on the land, and, on account of the
yield of the same, the field was rented for ten aureimore every year. The
question arose whether the owner could sue the tenant, who had been ejected
from the land for non-payment of rent, on the ground that rent was due; or
whether he could recover the expense profitably incurred by planting the vines
where an exception on the ground of fraud was filed. The answer was that he
could either recover the expense, or that he would be liable for nothing more.
(1) A man leased for a certain sum a vessel to sail from the province of Cyrene
to Aquileia, it being loaded with three thousand measures of oil and eight
thousand bushels of grain. It happened, however, that the vessel, while loaded,
was detained in said province for nine months, and the cargo was confiscated.
The question arose whether the freight agreed upon could be collected by the
owner of the vessel
from the party who hired it, in accordance with the contract. The answer was
that, in conformity to the facts stated, this could be done.
62. Labeo, Probabilities, Book I.
If you make a contract for digging a canal, and complete it, and, before it is
accepted, it is destroyed by accident, the risk will be yours. Paulus says
that, even if the accident occurred through some fault of the ground, the party
hiring the work to be done must be responsible; but if it happened because the
work was defective, you must bear the loss.1
1 The contract of leasing and hiring was one to which the Roman legal
authorities devoted much attention, and their conclusions form the basis of all
modern jurisprudence on the subject. There is no topic in the entire literature
of the Civil Law which has been discussed more carefully and exhaustively than
this by the great lawyers of both the Republic and the Empire, as, indeed,
befits one so intimately connected with the daily intercourse of mankind. It
embraced every species of property, real and personal, and to be valid required
the consent of both parties, differing only from purchase and sale in that, by
the latter, ownership in the object of the transaction was transferred, while,
in leasing and hiring, the party to whom it was delivered was only entitled to
use it. Some articles, however, such as grain, money, and wine, which cannot be
used without their consumption, were incapable of being leased or hired.
The lessor was bound to give possession of the thing leased in good condition,
to keep it in proper repair, and to be responsible for its undisturbed
enjoyment by the lessor for the term agreed upon by the contracting parties. He
was also required to pay all damages resulting from irresistible violence or
unavoidable accident, and to indemnify the lessee for any necessary expenses he
might have incurred in preserving the property from decay or ruin, or in
keeping it in such a condition that it could be rendered available in
compliance with the terms of the contract. Unless where an express provision
was made to the contrary, the lessor was considered to warrant his title to
such an extent as to guarantee the lessee against eviction, or, where he was in
no wise to blame, to make good to him any damage which he may have sustained,
either by the payment of a sufficient indemnity, or by replacing the property,
the use of which had been lost, by some other, similar in every respect, and
satisfactory to the lessee.
No particular legal formality was prescribed to render the parties liable in a
contract of leasing and hiring. The only essential requisite was consent, and
the agreement might be either verbal or written. Its scope was, in general,
much broader than that of those executed under the rules of the Common Law, as
the distinction between the principles applicable to real and personal property
under these circumstances not being so clearly defined, greater latitude of
construction was possible. The lease might be conditional, and, in the case of
an urban estate, the tenant was obliged to relinquish possession at any time
when the landlord notified him that he wanted the premises for his own personal
use.
In case the parties, not being able to agree on the terms, consented to abide
by the decision of another, it was not absolutely settled as to whether such a
contract would stand, but the weight of opinion seems to be in its favor.
Where land was rented, the Kalends of July was fixed by common consent as the
date from which the lease would begin to run; other contracts under this head
were understood to take effect from the Kalends ofMarch. In the case of real-
estate, the term was ordinarily a lustrum,or period of five years, which was
adopted because of the census, and the revaluation of property which took place
at the end of every quinquennium.It was indispensable that the compensation
should be adequate, whether it had reference to the cultivation of the soil,
personal services, or labor to be performed. It also had to be certain, and not
dependent upon any contingency, unless expressly provided for; hence the amount
of the crop


TITLE III.
CONCERNING THE ACTION FOR THE ESTIMATION OF THE VALUE OF PROPERTY.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.
The action for the estimation of the value of property was invented for the
purpose of removing doubt. For when property which had been appraised was given
to another to be sold, it was doubtful whether an action on sale based on the
estimated value would lie; or whether one on lease would be available, as I
seemed to have leased the property for the purpose of sale; or whether one on
hiring could be brought, since I hired the services of the party to sell it, or
whether recourse could be had to an action on mandate? It, therefore, seemed to
be betto be delivered as rent was required to be specifically indicated, and
not merely a share of what might be produced.
The entire crop was considered to be hypothecated to the landlord to secure the
payment of the rent; and this also applied to any personal property which the
tenant brought on the premises during his term, whether he occupied a farmhouse
or a city residence.
The common benefit, mutua utilitas, resulting from the contract of leasing and
hiring, rendered both parties responsible for ordinary negligence, when any
damage resulted from the act of either.
If the lessee was in default for two years in paying the rent, the lessor could
forcibly enter on the premises without having recourse to legal process, and
seize any personal effects of the lessee which he was able to find; and, in
case the lessee absented himself for any length of time, the presumption was
that he had abandoned the property, and the lessor could at once bring suit to
secure the annulment of the contract.
While some doubt seems to have existed with respect to the determination of the
lease when the land was sold, the prevailing opinion seems to have been that it
was cancelled, ipso facto, by a sale. As with us, it was not unusual for it to
be inserted in the agreement that if the land should be alienated, the tenant
must give possession. If the landlord permitted him to remain after the
expiration of his term, the lease was, as a rule, held to be tacitly renewed
from year to year. This understanding was, however, largely dependent upon
statute and the ordinary practice of the neighborhood. In some cases, the lease
was considered to remain in force until notice of its determination was served
by either party upon the other.
The locatio operis, or hiring of labor, was a contract by which one person
furnished the materials and the other performed the work. The artisan was
responsible for the negligence of himself and his subordinates. He was also
liable for ignorance or want of dexterity, where the possession of the adequate
knowledge and experience requisite for the performance of the task which he had
undertaken was implied. Lack of skill was equivalent to negligence: "Imperitia
culpौ adnumeratur." If, through no fault of his own, he was unable to do what
he had agreed to, he could claim entire freedom from responsibility, and even
had a right to collect the full amount of the compensation which had been
promised him for his services.
The ordinary term of a lease of land for cultivation under the old Babylonian
system was three years; that of a house was one year. It was always customary
to pay a small sum in advance, which was considered rather as earnest money
than a credit on the rent, and until that was done, the tenant was not entitled
to full possession, and the landlord could enter on the premises without
ceremony. The latter usually provided the necessary implements and stock, as
well as the
ter for the above-mentioned action to be introduced; for, as often as any doubt
arises with reference to the character of a contract, and it is, nevertheless,
advisable that some action should be granted; the one above referred to,
explanatory of the agreement, should be granted; for this is a civil
transaction and one dependent upon good faith. Wherefore all the principles are
relevant in this instance, which we have stated are applicable to bona fide
actions.
(1) The estimate of property, however, is made at the risk of the person who
receives it, and hence he must either restore the property itself in an
undamaged condition, or pay the amount of the appraisement agreed upon.
2. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXX.
This action is an equitable one, and involves compensation.
seed, and food for the support of the tenant and his employees, while the
latter was obliged to take good care of everything. If there was no dwelling-
house on the land he was compelled to build one, and to give it up as part of
the premises, at the expiration of his lease. The rent was, in almost every
instance, a certain share of the crop. A striking peculiarity of these ancient
contracts is that the names of all the landlords (or landladies) are those of
females. Unlike the rule of the Civil Law, the tenant was responsible for
unavoidable accident. He was also held to strict accountability in other
respects, and only under adverse circumstances was permitted to sub-let the
land.
"If a man rent a field for cultivation and do not produce any grain in the
field, they shall call him to account, because he has not performed the work
required on the field, and he shall give to the owner of the field grain on the
basis of the adjacent fields.
"If a man rent his field to a tenant for crop-rent, and receive the crop-rent
of his field, and later, Adad (the Storm God) inundate the field and carry away
the produce, the loss falls on the tenant.
"If he has not received the rent of his field, and he has rented the field for
either one-half or one-third of the crop, the tenant and the owner of the field
shall divide the grain which is in the field according to agreement.
"If the tenant give the cultivation of the field into the charge of another ---
because in a former year he has not gained a maintenance --- the owner of the
field shall not interfere. He would cultivate it, and his field has been
cultivated and at the time of the harvest he shall take grain according to his
contracts." (The Code of Hammurabi, Secs. 42, 45, 46, 47. Babylonian and
Assyrian Laws, Chap.
XXVI.)
Hindu law, corresponding to that of Rome, released the lessee from
responsibility in case of unforeseen calamity, but made him liable in case of
negligence. If he erected a building, he could remove it when his term expired,
if he had paid the rent in full.
"If a Person paying Rent and Hire builds a new House upon the Lands of any
Stranger, and lives there, in that Case, whenever he quits that Place, and pays
up his Rent without a Balance, he may do what he pleases with the House.
"If a Person hath hired any Thing from another, and the Thing so hired, without
any unexpected Calamity, or Innovation of the Magistrate, be spoiled by the
Fault of that Person, he shall make it good; if it be damaged by any natural
Accident, or by the Innovation of the Magistrate, he shall not make it good."
(Gentoo Code, Chap. X.)
In executing the provisions of their leases the Jews attached great importance
to the customs of the province, which, in the absence of an explicit agreement,
were always required to be observed. The contract was generally a partnership
one with equal division of the profits and expenses, although sometimes
pecuniary


TITLE IV. CONCERNING THE EXCHANGE OF PROPERTY.

1. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.
Just as it is one thing to sell, and another to buy, and as a difference exists
between purchaser and vendor, so the price is one thing, and the property
another. In an exchange, however, it cannot be ascertained which is the
purchaser and which the vendor. Exchanges differ greatly, for a purchaser is
liable to an action on sale, unless he pays the purchase-money to the vendor;
and it is sufficient for the vendor to bind himself in case of eviction, to
deliver possession and be free from fraud, and therefore, if the property sold
is not lost by a better title, he owes nothing.
compensation was provided in lieu of half the crop. Where money was paid, no
deduction from the rent was allowed, nor could this be done where the crop was
destroyed by an inundation or some other misfortune or accident, which was not
general in its character. If a tenant neglected to cultivate a field, he was
compelled to pay a sum equal to the appraised value of the largest crop that
could be raised upon it. He could not give it up if he had raised a quantity of
grain equal to the seed required. Where a house was rented by the month, the
tenant could not be dispossessed for six months, during the rainy season, from
the Feast of Tabernacles until Passover, in the country; or for twelve months
in a city. Certain trades had specified periods assigned to them.
"The term for shops of bakers and dyers is three years."
"If I allow the field to lie fallow and do not work it, I shall pay according
to the best possible results."
"If, therefore, there is a probability that the products raised will be
sufficient to resow the field therewith he is not permitted to abandon it."
"If the lessee has leased the field for a money consideration, he cannot deduct
from the rental under any circumstances." (Mishnah, VIII, 6; Chaps. 3, 5, 6.)
The English law, as laid down by Bracton, gave the landlord, in case of
nonpayment of rent, the right to seize as pledge any personal property brought
upon the premises by the tenant, and if nothing of this kind could be found,
recourse could be had to the body of the delinquent party, in accordance with
the maxim: "Qui non habet in sere luat in corpore"; a proceeding, like so many
others, borrowed directly from Roman jurisprudence, but not, in modern times,
arbitrarily enforceable as formerly. "Omnia invecta & illata tam pro mercede
quam alijs pignori sunt annexa. Et quid si nihil in domibus locatis & conductis
inueniatur, recurrendum erit ad corpora conductorum, si inveniantur, quod
locatori prospiciatur de securitate, si ab initio non sit prospectum. Si autem
corpora non inueniantur, hoc poterit locator suौ imputare negligentiौ vel
imperitiौ." (Bracton, De Leg. et Consuet. Angliौ, II, XXVIII, 62.)
Certainty was an essential element of all leases from the earliest times, under
the English law. "Tenant pur terme d'ans est lou home lessa termes an tenements
a un auter pur terms de certaine ans, selonque le number des ans que est accord
parenter le lessor et le lessee." (Littleton, Tenures, I, VII, 68.)
"In every lease for yeares the terme must have a certaine beginning and a
certaine end." (Coke, Institutes of the Laws of England 45, b.) Originally, a
lease could not be made for more than forty years, which was afterwards reduced
to a period of three lives, or twenty-one years. Long term leases always raised
a presumption of fraud.
Actual or symbolic delivery of possession was not necessary in the case of a
lease, as it was where land was conveyed. "En lease pur terme d'ans, per fait
ou sans fait, il ne besoygne ascun liverie de seizin d'estre fait al lessee,
mes iI poit
In an exchange, however, if the property of each party is regarded as the price
of that of the other, the title to each article must pass, but if it is
considered as merchandise, neither is required to transfer the ownership. But,
while in a sale there must be both property and a price, it cannot be
ascertained in an exchange which is the property, and which is the price, nor
does reason permit that the same thing shall be at once the property sold and
the price of what is purchased.
(1) Wherefore, if one of the articles which I have received or given is
afterwards taken away through a better title, it is held that an action in
factum should be granted.
(2) Moreover, purchase and sale is contracted by the mere will of the parties
consenting to the same; an exchange, however, gives rise to an obligation by
the delivery of the property. Otherwise, if the property was not delivered, we
hold that an obligation could be con-
entrer quant il veut per force de mesme le lease." (Littleton, Tenures, I, VII,
69.)
Waste was originally a term of extremely broad significance in English
jurisprudence. Formerly, even the construction of a new building was classed
under that head, but this rule no longer obtains, and there must be some
absolute injury to the property committed in order to constitute waste.
"The tenant cutteth down trees for reparations and selleth them, and after
buyeth them againe, and imploys them about necessary reparations, yet it is
waste by the vendition; he cannot sell trees, and with the money cover the
house; burning the house by negligence or mischance is waste." (Coke,
Institutes, 53, b.)
"Injury need not consist in loss of market value; an alteration not otherwise
mischievous may be waste in that it throws doubt on the identification of the
property, and thereby impairs the evidence of title." (Pollock, The Law of
Torts, II,
IX, 4.)
Entry by the tenant is necessary to vest the estate in him. While a definite
time must be appointed for the determination of the lease, still the lessor may
covenant for a perpetual renewal of the same. Ground, or building leases for
ninety-nine years, are frequently made in England, as well as this country. In
the absence of an agreement to the contrary, the tenant is liable for repairs,
taxes,
and assessments.
A "tack," as a lease is known in Scotland, if verbal, and made for a term of
years, is good in law for only one year. It is not valid as against a
subsequent purchaser of the premises if he desires to eject the tenant. "Tacks,
therefore, that are given verbally, to endure for a term of years, are good
against neither party for more than one year."
"Tacks are, like other contracts, personal rights in their own nature, and
consequently ineffectual against singular successors in the lands, whose right
reaches to the removing of tenants from their own property, notwithstanding any
tack they may have got from the former proprietor." (Erskine, Principles of the
Law of Scotland, II, VI, 8, 9.) "No obligation to grant or renew a lease is of
any avail against purchasers or other singular successors." (More, Lectures on
the Law of Scotland, Vols. II, VIII, XIV.)
As in England, possession takes the place of delivery. To render a tenant
liable to taxes or other public assessments, this must be expressly stated in
the contract. "Tenants are obliged to pay no cesses or public burdens to which
they are not expressly bound by their tacks." (Erskine, Principles of the Law
of Scotland, II, VI, 18.)
Where the rent remains unpaid for two years, as at Civil Law, the lease may be
annulled at the instance of the lessor, and the landlord has a lien on the
crops as well as the personal property of the tenant. "The landlord has in
security of his tack-duty, over and above the tenant's personal obligation, a
tacit pledge of
tracted by mere consent, which is only applicable to agreements of this kind
which have their own specific designations, as purchase, sale, lease, and
mandate.
(3) Therefore Pedius says that where a party gives property which belongs to
another an exchange is not contracted.
(4) Hence, where delivery is made by one party, and the other refuses to
deliver his property, we cannot institute proceedings for the reason that it is
to our interest to have received the article concerning which the agreement was
made; but there will be ground for a personal suit for recovery to compel the
property to be restored to us, just as if the transaction had not taken place.
2. The Same, On Plautius, Book V.
Aristo says that an exchange resembles a sale in a case where a guarantee must
be given that a slave is sound, and free from liability to arrest for theft or
damage committed, and that he is not a fugitive who must be surrendered on this
account.
hypothec, not only in the fruits, as he had by the Roman law, but in the cattle
pasturing on the ground. The corn and other fruits are hypothecated for the
rent of that year whereof they are the crop." (Erskine, Principles of the Law
of Scotland, II, VI, 26.)
When there is no stipulation to the contrary, the tenant can sell or remove the
fodder of the last crop, but he is required by the implied conditions of his
contract, as well as by the rule of the Common Law, to leave all the remainder,
with the manure, on the land.
The lease of a building in a town implies the right to assign or sub-let the
same, in the absence of any provision forbidding it. "The lease of an urban
tenement for a term of years implies the right of assigning or sub-letting,
unless this has been expressly prohibited." (More, Lectures on the Law of
Scotland, Vols. II, VIII, 2.)
A landlord is not compelled to replace any buildings which have been destroyed,
or badly damaged, but the tenant is, in consequence, at liberty to finally
renounce his lease.
Moslem law does not look with favor upon leases of long duration. "Generally, a
lease of a house should not exceed a year, and of land a period of two years."
Contracts of this kind are usually for the rent of estates held in trust, a
branch of jurisprudence which occupies more space than any other in the code of
Islam. If no provision for leases should be made by the party who creates the
trust, the magistrate, where it is to the advantage of the beneficiary, is
authorized to grant them in his discretion.
The lessor is considered the owner of any building which he may erect without
injury to the land. "The lessee can remove such erections as he has built with
his own money, provided their removal does not damage the property. If it does,
the lessee will not be entitled to remove such erections." (Syed Ameer Ali,
Mohammedan Law, Vol. I, Chap. XII, Sec. III.) Where a tenant plants trees, they
are also held to be his property. "Upon the term of the lease expiring, it is
incumbent on the lessee to remove his buildings or trees, and to restore the
land to the lessor in such a state as may leave him no claim upon it, because
houses or trees have no specific limit of existence, and if they were left upon
the land it might be injurious to the proprietor."
A lease of land must state specifically the use to which it is to be applied,
as well as the nature of the crop that is to be raised upon it. Any uncertainty
in the terms of a contract for leasing and hiring renders it void. (The Hedaya,
III, XXXI, 4.)


TITLE V.

CONCERNING ACTIONS PRAESCRIPTIS VERBIS, AND IN
FACTUM.

1. Papinianus, Questions, Book VIII.
It sometimes happens that existing and common actions will not lie, and we
cannot find the proper name for the proceeding; so we readily have recourse to
those designated in factum. In order that examples may not be wanting, I will
give a few.
(1) Labeo states that a civil action in factum should be granted to the owner
of merchandise against the master of a ship, where it is uncertain whether he
leased the ship, or hired the services of the master, for the transportation of
his goods.
(2) Likewise, where anyone delivers property to another for examination in
order to establish the price of the same, a transaction which is neither a
deposit nor a loan for use, and the party does not show good faith, a civil
action in factum can be brought against him.
2. Celsus, Digest, Book VIII.
For when common and ordinary causes of action are lacking, proceedings must be
instituted under that available for the explanation of the terms of the
contract.
3. Julianus, Digest, Book XIV.
It is necessary to have recourse to this action wherever contracts exist, the
names of which have not been stated by the Civil Law:
The law with reference to leases varies greatly in the United States, in some
commonwealths, actual entry is not necessary to perfect the title of the
lessee, if the lease has been properly executed and delivered; in general,
however, he acquires no estate until he has entered upon the premises. The
Statute of Frauds (29 Car. II, Ch. 3), which provides that a lease for more
than three years if not in writing and signed by the parties shall have the
force and effect of an estate at will only, has been practically reenacted by
all the States. In some cases a lease for a hundred years is considered a fee
as long as fifty are unexpired; in others only a chattel interest is created. A
lease is always assignable, and the premises may be sub-let by the tenant where
no provision is expressly made to the contrary. So long as the tenant has
possession he will be liable for the rent. "Nothing but a release, surrender,
or eviction will absolve a tenant in whole or in part from the covenants in his
lease."
Unless it has been specifically agreed upon, the lessor is not compelled to
make repairs, nor can the lessee collect anything for doing so, or be entitled
to any rebate of the rent on that account. The tenant is responsible for injury
sustained by third parties due to some ruinous or other bad condition of the
premises. (Washburn, A Treatise on the American Law of Real Property, II, X,
Secs. I to VII.)
A guarantee against eviction is implied in the execution of every lease. Unlike
the English law, the landlord is liable for the payment of taxes and other
public impositions. He is also obliged to previously inform the tenant of
anything which may render the premises undesirable for residence or dangerous
to health, if he was aware of the fact, or could have known it provided he had
exercised proper care. In some States, in accordance with the well-known
principle of the Civil Law, the landlord has a lien on all the personal
property of the tenant for the rent and damages, and the latter may be
compelled to waive the benefit of all exemptions whatsoever in the execution of
the contract. --- ED.
4. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXX.
For it arises from the nature of things, that there are more business
transactions than terms to designate them.
5. Paulus, Questions, Book V.
My natural son is in your service, and your son is in mine. It is agreed
between us that you shall manumit mine, and that I shall manumit yours. I did
so, but you did not. The question arose as to under what action you will be
liable to me. In the consideration of this point every kind of transaction
relative to the delivery of property must be taken into account which is shown
in the following example, namely: I either give to you that you may give to me,
or I give to you that you may perform some act, or I perform some act that you
may give to me, or I perform some act for you that you may perform another for
me. In these cases it may be asked what obligation arises.
(1) If, in fact, I give money that I may receive some property in return, the
transaction is one of purchase and sale. If, however, I give an article in
order to receive another, for the reason that it is not held that an exchange
of property is a purchase, there is no doubt that a civil obligation arises on
account of which an action can be brought, not to compel you to return what you
have received, but that you may indemnify me to the extent of my interest in
receiving the article which was the subject of the contract; or if I prefer to
receive my property, an action can be brought to recover what was given,
because property was given on one side but not on the other.
If, however, I gave you certain cups in order that you might give Stichus to
me, Stichus will be at my risk, and you will be responsible only for
negligence. This is the explanation of the agreement, "I give in order that you
may give."
(2) But where I give in order that you may perform some act, and the act is
such that it can be hired; for example that you may paint a picture, and money
is paid, it will be a hiring, just as a purchase was made in the former
instance. Where the transaction is not a hiring, a civil action either arises
with reference to my interest, or a suit for the recovery of the property will
lie.
But if the act is such that it cannot be the subject of a contract for hire,
as, for instance, that you manumit a slave, whether a certain time is added
within which he must be manumitted, and when he could have been manumitted the
time elapsed during the lifetime of the slave; or whether the time had not
elapsed, but a sufficient period had passed when he could and should have been
manumitted, an action can be brought for his recovery, or one for the
construction of the contract. What we have already stated is applicable to
these cases.
If, however, I gave you a slave in order that you might manumit your slave, and
you did so, and the one that I gave you is lost through a better title; if I
gave him to you knowing that he was the property of another, Julianus says that
an action based on fraud should be granted against me. If I was ignorant of the
fact, a civil action in factum can be brought against me.
(3) If I perform some act in order that you may give me something, and after I
have performed the act, you refuse to give it; a civil action will not lie, and
therefore one on the ground of bad faith will be granted.
(4) If I perform some act in order that you may perform another, this includes
several transactions. For if you and I agree that you can collect a claim from
my debtor at Carthage, and that I can collect one from yours at Rome, or, that
you may build a house on my land, in order that I may build one on yours, and I
build mine, you fail to build yours; it is held that, in the former example, a
mandate is given, as it were, without which money cannot be collected in the
name of another. For even though expenses should be incurred on both sides,
still, we are each doing a service for one another, and a mandate founded on an
agreement may extend beyond its natural limits. For I can direct you to be
responsible for the safe-keeping of the property, and, order that, in
collecting the debt, you shall not spend more than ten aurei.Where we both
spend the same amount, there can be no cause for dispute, but if only one
performs the act, so that in this instance a mandate seems to have been given,
for example, that he should refund to one another the expenses incurred by
each, I give you no mandate with reference to your own property.
It will, however, be safer both in the construction of houses and in the
collection of debts, to hold that an action should be granted for the
interpretation of the contract, which resembles an action on mandate, just as
in the former cases a resemblance exists between the action on hiring and the
one on sale.
(5) Hence, if these things are true, where it has been agreed upon by both
parties to perform reciprocal acts, the same can be said with reference to the
question proposed; and it necessarily follows that judgment must be rendered
against you to the extent of my interest in the slave that I manumitted. Should
a deduction be made because I now have a freedman? This, however, cannot be
taken into consideration.
6. Neratius, Opinions, Book I.
I sold you a house on condition that you would repair another. The opinion was
given that there was no sale, but that a civil action could be brought for an
uncertain amount of damages.
7. Papinianus, Questions, Book II.
If I gave you ten aurei in order that you might manumit Stichus, and you failed
to do so; I can at once bring an action prौscriptis verbis to force you to pay
the amount of my interest; and if I have no interest, I can bring an action
against you to compel you to restore the ten aurei.
8. The Same, Questions, Book XXVII.
Where a master, after having stated the value of his slave, delivered him up to
be put to torture when he was accused of theft, and he was
not found guilty, and he to whom he was delivered would not return him, a civil
action can be brought against him on this ground; although, under certain
circumstances, a party to whom a slave has been delivered can retain him. For
he can retain a slave if the owner prefers to receive the money instead, or
where he has been caught committing a crime; for then the amount at which he
has been appraised must be paid by his master. But the question, however,
arises, by what action the money can be recovered, if the master chooses to
receive the appraised value of the slave? I stated that, although what was
agreed among the parties was not prescribed by the terms of a stipulation,
still, if the intention of the contract was not obscure, an action prौscriptis
verbis could in this case be brought, and that it should not be held that a
mere agreement without consideration had been made, since it could be proved
that the property was given under a certain condition.
9. The Same, Opinions, Book XL
Where anyone is released from liability on condition that he will delegate his
obligation to Titius, as debtor, and he does not comply with the condition of
the contract, he will be liable to an action for an uncertain amount of
damages. Hence it is the duty of the judge, not to see that the old obligation
is restored, but that the promise shall be fulfilled, or judgment be rendered.
10. Javolenus, Epistles, Book XIII.
A certain man bequeathed the usufruct of a third of his estate. The property of
his heir was sold by his creditors, and the woman to whom the bequest was made
received, in the place of the usufruct, the amount of the appraisement of the
third part of the estate, and, through ignorance, the ordinary stipulation was
omitted. I ask whether suit can be brought by the heir of the woman for the
money which was given her, instead of the enjoyment of the usufruct, and if so,
what kind of a suit? I answered that an action in factum should be granted.
11. Pomponius, On Quintus Mucius, Book XXXIX.
For the reason that the number of actions is not sufficient in every instance,
recourse, in general, is had to those in factum. So far as actions prescribed
by the laws are concerned, where one is just and necessary, the prौtor supplies
it, if no provision for the case has been made by legislation. This he does
under the Lex Aquilia, by granting actions in factum adapted to the purpose,
which the utility of said law requires.
12. Proculus, Epistles, Book XI.
Where a man sold certain lands to his wife, and an agreement was entered into
at the time that, if the marriage was dissolved, the wife should transfer to
her husband the said lands for the same price, if he desired her to do so, I
think that an action in factum ought to be granted, and that this rule should
also be observed with reference to other persons.
13. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXX.
If I give you property to be sold for a certain price, with the understanding
that if you sell it for more you can keep the surplus, it is held that neither
an action on mandate, nor one on partnership will lie, but that one in factum
should be brought, as in the case of voluntary agency; for the reason that a
mandate should be gratuitous, and a partnership is not held to be formed with
reference to a person who does not admit you as a partner in the sale, but
reserves a certain portion of the proceeds for himself.
Julianus states in the Eleventh Book of the Digest: "If I give to you the
ownership of an unoccupied tract of land belonging to me, on condition that
after having built a house thereon, you will convey to me a share in the same;
this transaction is not a sale, because I receive a part of my own property
instead of the price; nor is it a mandate, because it is not gratuitous, nor a
partnership, for the reason that no one, in entering into a partnership, ceases
to be the owner of his own property." But if I give you said land for the
purpose of instructing a boy, or to pasture a flock, or for the support of a
boy with the understanding that if it should be sold after the lapse of a
certain number of years, the purchase-money shall be divided between us; this
is a very different transaction from that relative to the unoccupied land,
because in this case he who formerly owned the property does not cease to be
the proprietor of the same, and therefore an action on partnership will lie.
If, however, I should transfer to you the ownership of a young slave, the same
rule will apply, as in the case of the land, because the ownership ceases to
vest in the former proprietor. What, then, is the rule? Julianus thinks that an
action in factum should be granted, that is to say, one for the interpretation
of the contract. Hence, if the party does not transfer the ownership of the
land, but permits you to build upon it with the understanding that either the
land, or the price of the same, if sold, shall be divided, this will be a
partnership.
The same principle applies where the proprietor transfers the ownership of a
portion of the land, reserving that of the remainder, and permits a house to be
built under the same condition.
14. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XLI.
Where anyone throws merchandise belonging to another into the sea for the
purpose of saving his own, he will not be liable to any action. If, however, he
does this without any reason, he will be liable to an action in factum; and if
he should do so with malicious intent, he will be liable to an action on that
ground.
(1) If anyone should strip a slave belonging to another, and he dies of cold,
an action on the ground of the theft of his clothing as well as one in factum
on account of the slave can be brought; the right to proceed criminally against
the thief remaining unimpaired.
(2) If anyone should throw into the sea a silver cup belonging to another,
Pomponius, in the Seventeenth Book on Sabinus, says that
neither an action of theft, nor one on the ground of unlawful damage will lie,
but that one in factum can be brought.
(3) Where acorns fall upon my land from a tree belonging to you, and I permit
my cattle to feed upon them, Aristo says that he knows of no legal action
whereby I can proceed, because suit with reference to the pasturage of the
cattle cannot be brought under the Law of the Twelve Tables, as they did not
pasture upon your premises, nor one for trespass, nor one for unlawful damage.
Hence an action in factum should be brought.
15. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XLII.
Persons who know where fugitive slaves are concealed should inform their
masters, and this does not render them guilty of theft; for it is usual for
them to receive a reward for doing so, if they disclose the hiding place of
said slaves, and the gift in this instance is not deemed unlawful; therefore,
the party who receives the reward need not fear a suit for its recovery,
because he received it for a good reason, and not for one which is
dishonorable.
Where, however, nothing was paid, but an agreement was entered into with
reference to the information, that is to say, that a certain sum should be
given to the party if he disclosed the hiding-place of the slave, and the
latter is apprehended, let us see whether an action can be brought. In fact,
this is not an agreement without consideration, from which it may be held that
an action will not arise, but it includes a certain transaction, and therefore
can become the ground for a civil action; that is, one prौscriptis verbis,
unless someone may say that, in this case, a suit on the ground of fraud will
lie, where bad faith can be established.
16. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XXII.
You permitted me to dig chalk on your land on condition that I would fill up
the place from whence I took it. I took away the chalk, but did not fill up the
excavation. The question arose, what action are you entitled to? It is certain
that a civil action for an unascertained amount of damages will lie. Where,
however, you sold me the chalk, you can proceed by an action on sale. If, after
taking out the chalk, I should fill up the excavation, and you do not allow me
to remove the chalk, I will then have a right of action for production against
you, because it belongs to me, as I dug it with your consent.
(1) You gave me permission to sow grain on your land, and to remove the crop. I
sowed it, but you did not allow me to remove the grain. Aristo says that a
civil action will not lie, and it may be a question whether an action in factum
should be granted, but that one on the ground of bad faith will certainly be
available.
17. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXVIII.
If I give you a gratuitous lodging in my house, can I proceed against you on
the ground of a loan for use? Vivianus says that I can; but it is safer to
bring suit for the construction of the contract.
(1) If I give you a jewel the value of which has been appraised, on condition
that you will restore it to me, or pay me the price of the same; and it should
be destroyed before the sale was concluded, who must bear the loss? Labeo says,
and Pomponius also holds that if I, as the vendor, ask you to dispose of it,
the risk will be mine, but if you ask me to do so, it will be yours; and if
neither one asks the other but we merely make an agreement, you will only be
liable for fraud and negligence, and, in this instance, an action prौscriptis
verbis will certainly lie.
(2) Papinianus states in the Eighth Book of the Questions: "If I gave you an
article for the purpose of examining it, and you allege that you have lost it,
an action for the construction of the contract will lie only if I am ignorant
where the article is. For if I know that it is in your possession, I can bring
an action of theft, or one for the recovery of the property, or one for its
production. Hence, if I have given the article to anyone to be examined, or for
his own benefit, or for the benefit of both of us, I hold that he must be
responsible to me for fraud and negligence, because of the advantage accruing
to him; but not for its loss. Where, however, I have given the article to him
for my own advantage, he will only be responsible for fraud, because this
transaction closely resembles a deposit."
(3) Where my neighbor and myself each have an ox, and it is agreed between us
that I shall lend mine to him for ten days, and that he shall lend me his for
the same space of time, for the purpose of doing our work; and either of the
oxen should die while in possession of the other party, an action on loan for
use will not lie, because the loan was not gratuitous, but proceedings for the
construction of the contract can be instituted.
(4) Where, when you intended to sell me clothing, I requested you to leave it
with me that I might show it to others more skilled in such matters than
myself, and it was destroyed by fire, or by some other irresistible force; I
will not be in the least responsible to you for its value. From which it is
manifest that I am liable only for the want of ordinary care.
(5) Where anyone receives rings to be held as security for a wager, and does
not surrender them to the one who wins it, an actio prौscriptis verbis can be
brought against him. The opinion of Sabinus, who thinks that, in this instance,
an action for recovery, and one on the ground of theft, will lie, should not be
adopted. For how can he bring an action on theft with reference to property
whose possession or ownership he has never enjoyed? It is clear, however, that
if the wager was dishonorable, the successful party can only recover his own
ring.
18. The Same, On the Edict, Book XXX.
If I deposit a sum of money with you for you to give to Titius if he brings
back my fugitive slave, and you do not give it to him because he did not
restore said slave, and you fail to return me the money, the best method is to
proceed by an action for the construction of the con-
tract, since the pursuer of the fugitive slave and myself did not deposit said
money, as is done in sequestration.
19. The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXI.
You asked me to loan you money, and as I did not have it, I gave you certain
property to be sold that you might make use of the proceeds. If you did not
sell said property, or you did sell it and did not take the price received as a
loan, it is safer to proceed, as Labeo says, by an action for the
interpretation of the contract, as if there had been a certain agreement
entered into between us.
(1) If I should mortgage a tract of land for your benefit, and it should
afterwards be agreed upon between us that you will furnish me a surety, and you
do not do so; I say that the better plan will be to bring an action for the
interpretation of the contract, unless some compensation is involved, for if it
is, an action on lease will lie.
20. The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXII.
It is asked by Labeo, "If I give you horses that I have for sale to be tried,
under the condition that you will return them within three days if they do not
please you, and you, being a performer in the circus, ride said horses and win
the prize, and then refuse to buy them; can an action on sale be brought
against you?" I think the better opinion is that an action should be brought
for the construction of the contract, for it was agreed upon between us that
you should take said horses for the purpose of trying them gratuitously, and
not that you should enter them in a race.
(1) The following question is asked by Mela: "If I let you have some mules for
the purpose of trying them, with the understanding that if they please you you
will buy them, but if they do not please you that you will pay me a certain sum
for each day, and the mules are stolen by robbers within the time given for the
trial; what must be made good, the money and the mules, or the mules alone?"
Mela says that it makes a difference whether the purchase had already been
concluded, or was to be concluded afterwards, for if the transaction was
complete, suit can be brought for the price; but if not, it can only be brought
for the mules. He does not mention, however, what actions are available, but I
think that if the purchase was perfected, an action on sale will lie; but if
this were not the case, that one can be brought like that granted against the
circus-performer.
(2) If when you wish to purchase silver plate, and a silversmith brings some to
you and leaves it, and, as it does not suit you, you give it to your servant to
be returned, and it is lost without fraud or negligence on your part; the loss
must be borne by the silversmith, because it was sent for his benefit as well
as yours. Labeo says that it is certain that you are responsible for the
negligence of those to whom the articles have been committed for safe-keeping
and delivery; and I think that an action for the construction of the contract
will lie in this instance.
21. The Same, Disputations, Book II.
Wherever an ordinary action or exception will not lie, a prौtorian action or
exception will be available.
22. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book X.
If I give you clothing to be cleaned or repaired, and you undertake to do the
work gratuitously, an obligation on mandate arises; but if compensation has
been given or agreed upon, the transaction is one of leasing and hiring. If,
however, you did not undertake it gratuitously, and compensation was neither
given at the time nor promised, but the transaction was entered into with the
understanding that afterwards payment should be made to the amount agreed upon
between us; it is settled that an action in factum should be granted, as in the
case of & new transaction, that is to say a suit for the interpretation of the
contract.
23. Alfenus, Epitomes of the Digest of Paulus, Book III.
Two persons were walking along the Tiber; one of them having asked the other to
show him his ring, he did so, and, while he was examining it, it fell from his
hands and rolled into the Tiber. The opinion was given that an action in factum
was available.
24. Africanus, Questions, Book VIII.
Titius lent Sempronius thirty aurei, it being agreed upon between them that, on
the return of the money, Sempronius should pay the taxes which Titius owed, the
interest being computed at six per cent; and in case the interest amounted to
more than the taxes, Sempronius should return the surplus of said interest to
Titius, and where the taxes were more than the interest, the excess should be
deducted from the principal; but if the amount of the taxes should exceed both
principal and interest, Titius should make good the amount to Sempronius; and
no formal stipulation with reference to the matter was made between the
parties.
Titius asked for an opinion as to what action he could bring in order to
recover from Sempronius the remainder of the interest, after payment of the
taxes. The answer was that interest on the money lent was not actually due
unless a stipulation had been entered into concerning the same; but in the case
stated it should be considered whether the transaction should not be held to be
a mandate agreed upon between the parties, rather than a loan at interest,
unless the interest collected exceeded six per cent. The action for the
recovery of the principal would not, indeed, be based on money loaned; for if
Sempronius had either lost the money without bad faith, or had kept it
unemployed, it must be said that he would not be at all liable on that ground.
Wherefore, it is the safer plan for an action in factum to be granted for the
construction of the contract, especially where it is also agreed that if the
amount of the taxes exceeds the interest it should be deducted from the
principal, which goes beyond the provisions of the law and the terms of the
contract for money loaned.
25. Marcianus, Rules, Book III.
Where anyone furnishes the services of his slave, who is an artisan, to
another, in exchange for those of a similar slave belonging to the latter, for
the same length of time, proceedings can be instituted by an actio prौscriptis
verbis, just as in the case where a party gives cloaks in return for tunics.
Nor is this inapplicable, if services which were not due should be rendered by
mistake, as these cannot be recovered; for in giving one thing in return for
another we contract an obligation under the Law of Nations, but where something
is given which is not due, either restitution should be legally demanded, or an
equal amount of the same thing should be returned, and by neither of these
methods can the services above mentioned be recovered.
26. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XXI.
If I gave you some cups with the understanding that you were to return them to
me, an action on loan for use will lie. If, however, I gave them to you on
condition that you would deliver to me their weight in silver, whatever that
might be; a demand for the recovery of this weight must be made by means of an
action for the construction of the contract, as well as one for silver of the
same fineness as that of which the cups were composed. But, if it was agreed
that you should return the cups, or an amount of silver equal to their weight,
the same rule will apply.
