THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS. BOOK XXV.


* 25.1 Concerning expenses incurred with reference to dotal property  27
* 25.2 Concerning the action to recover property which has been removed 30
* 25.3 Concerning the recognition and maintenance of children,
        parents, patrons, and freedmen 37
* 25.4 Concerning the examination of pregnant women, and the
        precautions to be taken with reference to their delivery 43
* 25.5 Where a woman is placed in possession of the estate of her
        husband in the name of her unborn child, and this possession is
        said to have been fraudulently transferred to another 47
* 25.6 Where a woman is said to have obtained possession of the
        estate of her husband in the name of her unborn child, by having
        made a false statement 48
* 25.7 Concerning concubines  50





* 25.1 Concerning expenses incurred with reference to dotal property.

1. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXIX.
Expenses are either necessary, useful, or incurred for purposes of
pleasure.
(1) Those expenses are called necessary which are made through necessity.
Where, however, no necessity exists, they come under another head.
(2) With reference to necessary expenses, it must be remembered that they only
decrease the dowry when they are incurred on account of it. When, however, they
are not incurred with reference to the dowry, they cannot be taken out of it.
(3) Labeo says that dikes built in the sea or river come under the head of
necessary expenses. Where a mill or a granary, which is required, is built, it
should be included among necessary expenses. Hence Falcinius says that if the
husband should rebuild a house which was useful to his wife, and which was
falling into ruin; or if he should replant an olive-orchard, where the trees
had blown down; or if he should enter into a stipulation providing against the
occurrence of threatened injury:
2. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
Or should expend money for the cure of slaves who are ill;
3. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXVI.
Or if he should plant vines, or takes care of trees or nurseries for the
benefit of the land, he will be held to have incurred necessary expenses.
(1) Generally speaking, we make a distinction, and in fact there is much
difference where expenses are incurred to the permanent advantage of the land,
and where this is done only for the present time, or on account of the crop for
the present year. In the latter instance, the expenses ought to be set off
against the crop, but where they have not been incurred temporarily, they
should be reckoned among those that are necessary.
4. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXVI.
Upon the whole the judge shall hold the husband responsible for whatever was
omitted by him, to the extent that it was to the interest of his wife to have
such expenses incurred, as they are included in those that are necessary, but
with this difference, namely: an account
of the expenses will be allowed, if the property has not been preserved, and he
will not be responsible where they were not incurred, unless the property was
destroyed in consequence. Therefore, if he should support a house which is
about to fall, and it is burned, he can recover the expenses; but if he did not
do this, and the house should be burned, he will not be liable for anything.
5. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXVI.
Where it is stated that necessary expenses diminish the dowry, this (as
Pomponius says) must be understood to mean not that the property itself is
actually diminished, as for instance, land or any other dotal property, for it
is absurd to hold that any diminution of the same can occur on account of money
expended; but it signifies that the said property ceases to become dotal either
wholly, or in part. Hence the husband will remain in possession of it until his
claim is satisfied, for no diminution of the same is effected, by operation of
law, but merely a diminution of the dowry takes place. When, therefore, shall
we admit that a diminution of the dowry occurs by operation of law? This will
be the case where the dowry consists of other property than money, for it is
reasonable to admit that a diminution of money can take place. Hence, if
certain property, after being appraised, is given by way of dowry, the dowry
will be diminished by operation of law to the amount of the necessary expenses
incurred. This is said to be applicable to expenses incurred with reference to
the dowry itself, but if they are made with reference to other matters they do
not diminish the dowry.
(1) Where the wife pays such necessary expenses, can we say that the dowry is
increased, or should it be held to remain unimpaired? Where the dowry consists
of money, I have no doubt that it should be held to have increased.
(2) Where the entire dowry is paid without any account having been taken of
expenses, it must be considered whether the amount which it is customary to set
off against necessary expenses can be recovered by a personal action. Marcellus
holds that there is ground for such action, and although many authorities deny
that this is the case, still, on account of equity, the opinion of Marcellus
should be upheld.
(3) Useful expenses are those which the husband incurs for the benefit of the
property, and which improve the property of the wife, that is to say, her
dowry.
6. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
For instance, where a new plantation is made on the land, or where the husband
adds a bakery or a shop to the house, or teaches the slaves some trade.
7. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXVI.
Expenses for the purpose of pleasure are those which the husband incurs to that
end, and which are an ornament to the property.
(1) Such expenses do not diminish the dowry by operation of law, as those which
are useful do, nevertheless, they can be demanded.
8. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
Certain authorities hold that a deduction should be made on the ground of
useful expenses only where they are incurred with the consent of the wife; for
it would be unjust for her to be compelled to sell the property in order to pay
the expenses incurred with reference to it, if she is unable to meet them
otherwise. This opinion is based upon the highest principles of justice.
9. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXVI.
The husband is permitted to demand from his wife expenses incurred for
pleasure, if she does not permit him to remove what caused them. For, if the
wife desires to retain such improvements, she should refund the amount expended
by her husband; or if she does not wish to retain them, she should permit him
to remove them, provided they admit of separation. If, however, they cannot be
separated, they should be left; for the husband is not allowed to take away any
ornaments which he has added to the property, unless by doing so he can make
them his own.
10. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXVI.
If the property on account of which the expenses were incurred is for sale,
such expenses are not classed under the head of pleasure, but of utility.
11. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXVI.
Aristo, however, says with reference to expenses incurred for pleasure, that
the husband cannot demand them, even if they have been made with the consent of
his wife.
(1) Sabinus very properly holds that gifts which are prohibited between husband
and wife also extend to expenses incurred on account of the dowry.
12. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
A judge should not pay any attention to moderate expenses incurred for the
purpose of building houses, or for planting and cultivating vines, or for the
treatment of slaves who are ill; otherwise a judicial decision would rather
seem to have reference to the transaction of business than to matters connected
with the dowry.
13. The Same, Abridgments, Book VII.
A husband cannot collect from his wife any tax or tribute paid on account of
dotal lands, for these charges should be paid out of the crops.
14. Ulpianus, Rules, Book V.
Necessary expenses are those through which the dowry is diminished, as, for
instance, those incurred for the building of dikes, the
diversion of streams, the supporting and repairing of old houses, and the
replacing of trees where others have died.
(1) Useful expenses are, for example, such as placing cattle in fields for the
purpose of manuring them.
(2) Expenses incurred for pleasure are, for instance, the construction of
baths.
15. Neratius, Parchments, Book II.
Where it is stated that necessary expenses incurred with reference to dotal
property diminish the dowry, this must be understood to mean where anything is
expended on such property over and above what is necessary for its
preservation, that is to say, for its benefit. For a man should preserve dotal
property at his own expense; otherwise, provisions furnished to dotal slaves,
and any moderate repairs of buildings, or even the cultivation of the soil,
would diminish the dowry; for all these things are included under the head of
necessary expenses. The property itself, however, is understood to yield a
certain income, so that you appear not to have expended money upon it, but,
after having deducted the expenses, you have received a smaller return
therefrom. It is not easy, generally speaking, to decide in accordance with
this distinction what expenses should be deducted from the dowry, but they can
be estimated in detail according to their nature and amount.
16. The Same, Parchments, Book VI.
And, by all means, any expenses incurred by the husband in harvesting the crops
must be paid by him out of his own purse, even though these expenses may have
been incurred for the purpose of cultivating the land; and therefore not only
those made in gathering the crops are included but also such as are necessary
for preserving the property itself, and the husband is entitled to no deduction
from the dowry on this account.


* 25.2 Concerning the action to recover property which has been removed.

1. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
The action having reference to property which has been removed is a peculiar
one, and is brought against a woman who was formerly the wife of the plaintiff,
for it was not held to be advisable that an action for theft should be brought
against her; and certain authorities, like Nerva and Cassius, have thought that
she did not commit a theft, because the partnership of married life rendered
her, to a certain extent, the owner of the property in question. Others, such
as Sabinus and Proculus, hold that she does, in fact, commit a theft, just as a
daughter can steal from her father, but that no action for theft is established
by law. Julianus very properly adopts this opinion.
2. Gaius, On the Work Entitled, The Edict of the Prौtor; Title, Decisions.
For, on account of the honor attaching to marriage, an action against the wife
implying infamy is refused.
3. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
Therefore, if, after a divorce a woman should appropriate the same property,
she will also be liable for theft.
(1) Moreover, we can bring an action for theft against a woman where her slave
has committed the theft.
(2) It is also possible to bring an action for theft against a woman, if we
should become the heir to the party from whom the property was stolen, or if
she had stolen from us before we married her. Still, on account of the respect
due to persons under such circumstances, in both cases, we hold that only an
action for theft to recover the property will lie, and not a penal one based on
that offence.
(3) It is also true, as Ofilius says, that all property which the woman has
consumed, sold, donated, or used up in any way whatsoever, at the time of the
divorce, should also be included in the suit for property appropriated by her.
(4) Where a daughter under paternal control fraudulently appropriates property,
Mela and Fulcinius say that an action de peculio should be granted, because it
was not considered advisable that she should be liable for theft, or that an
action should be brought against her on the ground of property wrongfully
appropriated.
If, however, a father, together with his daughter, brings an action on dowry,
an action should not be granted him, unless he gives security to defend his
daughter for the entire amount, in a suit for property improperly appropriated.
But where the daughter is dead, Proculus says that an action should not be
granted against the father, on the ground of property wrongfully appropriated,
unless to the extent that he has been pecuniarily benefited by the transaction,
4. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XVI.
Or where he has been guilty of fraud in order to prevent the property from
coming into his possession.
5. Papinianus, Questions, Book XI.
All equitable actions to recover property wrongfully appropriated, which has
come into his hands, can be brought against the father even during the lifetime
of his daughter.
6. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
Atilicinus and Fulcinius say that this action can be granted to a father-in-law
against his daughter-in-law.
(1) Whenever a dowry is given to a son under paternal control, the father-in-
law cannot bring an action for theft, where property has been appropriated by
reason of a divorce.
(2) This action for property wrongfully appropriated is also granted against
the husband if he is a son under paternal control, but shall such an action be
granted directly against him, or merely with reference to the peculium? We
repeat here the same rule which we have already stated applies to a daughter
under paternal control.
(3) If the husband should die after the divorce, his heir can bring the action
for the recovery of property fraudulently appropriated.
(4) The heir of the woman is also liable in an action of this kind, just as he
would be in one for the recovery of stolen property.
(5) Where the marriage is dissolved by the death of the husband, his heir can
recover the property either by an action for the partition of the estate, or by
one for its production in court. Aristo thinks very properly that he can bring
a personal action for restitution against the woman, because the property is
unjustly in her possession.
(6) Where a woman appropriates property after the death of her husband, she
does not commit theft, because a theft of property belonging to an estate which
is not yet in the possession of anyone cannot be committed; and therefore the
heir can bring suit to recover the property, or can file a petition claiming
the estate.
7. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXVI.
A wife is entitled to an action against her husband for the recovery of
property fraudulently appropriated, and she can set off the claim in her action
against that made by the husband, where he brings suit for the same cause.
8. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XVI.
If, when the dowry is paid to the wife or security is given to insure its
payment, it should not be stated that the husband shall have a right to bring
an action for the recovery of property wrongfully appropriated, he can,
nevertheless, bring such an action; for he has a right to do so even where
there is no dowry to be returned.
(1) Sabinus says that if a wife does not return the property which she has
wrongfully appropriated, judgment shall be rendered against her for the amount
which her husband will swear to in court.
9. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LVII.
For it is not just that the husband should be compelled to sell his own
property, even for its full value, if he is unwilling to do so.
10. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XXXVI.
Therefore, he should not be obliged to furnish any guarantee against eviction,
because the affair took place through the obstinacy of his wife.
11. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIII.
Marcellus stated in the Eighth Book of the Digest that whether a husband drove
his wife, or a wife her husband, from the house, and
removed the property, either would be liable to an action for the recovery of
property wrongfully appropriated.
(1) Where anyone institutes proceedings for the recovery of property wrongfully
appropriated, if he prefers to tender an oath, his adversary will be compelled
to swear that nothing was appropriated at the time of the divorce; provided
whoever tenders the oath himself or herself first takes the oath de calumnia.
(2) The husband, as well as the wife, is compelled to take the oath with
reference to property wrongfully appropriated. But the father of him or her who
appropriated the property is not obliged to be sworn, as it would be unjust for
anyone to take an oath relating to the act of another. That party, therefore,
is compelled to take the oath who is said to have appropriated the property,
and hence the heir of him or her who is said to have wrongfully appropriated it
is not compelled to be sworn.
(3) Where anyone desires to tender back the oath which has been tendered him,
it has been decided that the Prौtor shall not permit this to be done.
12. Paulus, Abridgments, Book VII.
Any more than where someone tenders an oath to a party whom he is suing to
recover stolen property, in order to ascertain whether he himself is the thief.
13. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIII.
Therefore, Labeo states that a woman is not permitted to tender back an oath;
and the Edict of the Prौtor is held to establish this.
14. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXVIII.
In an action for the recovery of property which has been wrongfully
appropriated, the husband or the wife shall be permitted to tender the oath
with reference to certain property, and to confirm what has been testified to
with reference to any other.
15. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book III.
In a case of this kind it makes no difference whether the parties are living
together or separately; since an action for property wrongfully appropriated
can even be brought against a woman who has taken it into a house in which she
is not living with her husband.
(1) A wife, a daughter-in-law, or the wife of a grandson can steal from her
husband, her father-in-law, and the grandfather of her husband, but still she
will not be liable for theft unless the son is not emancipated; for, in this
instance, the daughter-in-law commits a theft against her father-in-law, and is
liable to an action for theft.
16. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book II.
Where the property of a husband is confiscated, the wife can only be sued for
the simple value of what has been unlawfully appropriated; although, in all
other cases, judgment can be rendered against her for fourfold damages.
17. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXX.
Where a concubine wrongfully appropriates property, it is the practice to hold
her liable for theft. Consequently, we say that whenever a marriage is void,
as, for instance, where a ward marries her guard-
ian, or where matrimony is contracted, contrary to the laws, and in any other
case where it is not valid, the action to recover property wrongfully
appropriated will not lie, for the reason that it can only be brought where a
divorce takes place.
(1) When we speak of property wrongfully appropriated, we have reference not
only to that which the woman removes when she forms the intention of obtaining
a divorce, but also to such as she removes while she is still married, if, when
she leaves her husband, she conceals the property.
(2) Julianus says that not only property which is in existence is included in a
suit for wrongful appropriation, but also such as has already ceased to exist.
He says that, under these circumstances, a personal action can also be brought
for its recovery.
(3) Where a woman wrongfully appropriates property which has been given in
pledge to her husband, she will be liable to this action.
18. Paulus, Questions, Book VI.
A personal action for the recovery of such property will also lie in favor of
the owner of the same, but he is allowed to choose whether he will bring this,
or a real action.
19. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIV.
If a woman, at the time of the divorce, introduces thieves into the house of
her husband, and removes property by their agency, even if she herself does not
handle it, she will be liable to an action for its wrongful appropriation. It
is therefore true, as Labeo states, that a wife is liable to this action, even
if the property does not come into her possession.
20. Marcellus, Digest, Book VII.
Where a wife herself removes, or makes use of the services of the thief to
remove property which her husband purchased in good faith, and does this with
the intention of obtaining a divorce, judgment shall be rendered against her in
an action for the recovery of property wrongfully appropriated.
21. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXVII.
If a woman, despairing of the life of her husband, after having surreptitiously
removed some of his property, should obtain a divorce, and her husband should
recover, an equitable action for the recovery of property wrongfully
appropriated should be granted him.
(1) Where a slave belonging to a wife removes property of her husband by order
of his mistress who intends to obtain a divorce, Pedius thinks that she is not
guilty of theft, since she does not obtain
anything to his own advantage; nor is she held to have rendered- any aid to the
slave committing the offence, as the woman herself did not commit it, although
the slave should not obey his owner when ordered to commit a crime; but an
action on the ground of property wrongfully appropriated will lie.
(2) Still, if a slave given as dowry steals from the husband, and the wife knew
that he was dishonest, she must make good the entire loss to her husband; but
if she was not aware of the bad character of the slave, she will then not be
liable beyond the surrender of the slave by way of reparation.
(3) The action to recover property wrongfully appropriated is brought for
reparation of the injury, even though the exaction of the dowry can only
subsequently be demanded.
(4) If, where property has been wrongfully appropriated by his wife, the
husband has been deprived of some advantage, this must be taken into
consideration.
(5) Although this action arises from the commission of a crime, it still
includes the claim for the property, and therefore is not prescribed after the
expiration of a year, as is the case in a personal action for the recovery of
stolen goods. Moreover, it will lie in favor of heirs.
(6) In this action, neither the husband nor the wife can obtain any benefit
from insolvency, because it is based upon theft.
22. Julianus, Digest, Book XIX.
If a man brings an action against his wife on the ground of property wrongfully
appropriated by her, and the valuation of the same is made in court, and the
amount is paid, will she be entitled to bring suit to recover possession of the
property, if she has lost it? A difficulty arises here, because she obtained
possession by fraud. I answered that where anyone pays the amount of the
appraisement of the property in court, he should be considered to occupy the
position of a purchaser. Therefore, if the woman, against whom an action has
been brought on the ground of property wrongfully appropriated, pays the
appraised value of the same in court, she will be entitled to an exception
against the husband, or his heir, if either should bring suit to recover the
said property; and if she has lost possession of the same, a real action should
be granted her.
(1) Where a woman wrongfully appropriated property in anticipation of the death
of her husband, and he then dies, the heir can recover whatever had been
appropriated by an action for the estate, or by one for the production of
property in court.
23. Africanus, Questions, Book VIII.
Where marriage is re-established after a second divorce has taken place, it is
held that a right of action continues to exist on account of property
appropriated at the time of the first divorce, as well as on account of
expenses incurred or donations made during the previous marriage.
24. Ulpianus, Rules, Book V.
The husband is entitled to an action for recovery as well as the personal
action against his wife on the ground of property wrongfully appropriated by
her, whether it belongs to him or is included in the dowry; and it is in his
power to make use of whichever action he chooses.
25. Marcianus, Rules, Book III.
The action for property wrongfully appropriated is available where it was
removed with the intention of obtaining a divorce, and the divorce actually
followed; but if the wife appropriates the property of her husband during
marriage, although this action will not lie, the husband can, nevertheless,
bring a personal action to recover the said property; for, in accordance with
the Law of Nations, I hold that property can always be recovered by a personal
action from parties who hold possession of it unjustly.
26. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book IV.
The action for property wrongfully appropriated is a personal one.
27. Papinianus, Opinions, Book IV.
The action for property wrongfully appropriated does not differ from that in
which the woman is accused of the crime of adultery.
28. Paulus, Questions, Book VI.
Where a wife steals property belonging to her husband from a person to whom the
former lent it, the latter will be entitled to an action for theft against her,
although her husband can not bring such an action.
29. Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book XI.
The valuation of property wrongfully appropriated should be calculated with
reference to the time when it was taken, for the woman is in reality guilty of
theft, although she is punished with more leniency. For this reason property
thus wrongfully appropriated cannot be acquired through usucaption by a bona
fide possessor; but where it increases in value and is not returned, the
appraisement will also be increased; as is the case in an action for the
recovery of stolen property.
30. Papinianus, Questions, Book XL
Where an action is brought against a woman on the ground of property wrongfully
appropriated after the marriage has been dissolved, the action is extinguished
in case the marriage should be re-established.


* 25.3. CONCERNING THE RECOGNITION AND MAINTENANCE OF CHILDREN,
  PARENTS, PATRONS, AND FREEDMEN.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIV.
The Decree of the Senate enacted with reference to the recognition of children
is in two parts, one of which has reference to the recognition of children by
their parents, and the other to those who substitute spurious offspring.
(1) The Decree permits the woman herself, or her father under whose control she
is, or anyone who is directed by either of them, in case she believes herself
to be pregnant, to notify her husband, or her father under whose control she
is, within thirty days after the divorce; or to leave the notice at his
residence if there is no opportunity for personal service.
(2) We should understand the term "residence" to mean the lodging of the
husband, if he lives in a city, but if he does not, but resides in a country
house, or in a provincial town, the place where the parties have established
their domicile during marriage.
(3) The wife should merely notify the husband that she is pregnant by him. She
does not give this notice in order that her husband may send guards to watch
her, for it is sufficient for her to inform him that she is pregnant. The
husband should then either send persons to watch her, or should notify her that
she is not pregnant by him; and it is permissible for this notification to be
made by the husband himself, or by another party in his name.
(4) The penalty of the husband, if he does not send persons to watch, or does
not notify the woman that she is not pregnant by him, is that he shall be
compelled to recognize the child; and if he should not do so, to be punished
with extraordinary severity. Therefore, he should answer the notice, or it
should be answered in his name, that the woman is not pregnant by him. If this
is done, it will not be necessary for him to recognize the child, unless it is
really his own.
(5) It should be remembered that the notice does not proceed from the husband,
but from the woman.
(6) If, however, the husband should offer guards to watch his wife, and she
should not allow this; or if she does not give him notice of her condition; or
if she should give him notice, but not consent to accept the guards appointed
by the court, the husband or his father is at liberty to refuse to acknowledge
the child.
(7) Where a woman does not give notice of her pregnancy within thirty days, but
does so afterwards, she should be heard after proper cause is shown.
(8) If, however, she should entirely neglect to give the notice, Julianus says
that this does not in any way prejudice the child.
(9) We should understand the thirty days subsequent to the divorce to be
continuous, and not available days.
(10) In the Nineteenth Book of the Digest by Julianus, the following nice point
is suggested. If the woman should not notify her husband of her condition
within thirty days, but should be delivered of a child within that period, will
the Decree of the Senate apply? He says that, in this instance, the Plautian
Decree of the Senate will not be applicable, because it was not considered to
have reference to a child who was born within thirty days, for the Senate
appointed the thirty days for the notification of the pregnancy. I think,
however, that this would not in any way prejudice the child.
(11) Just as, on the other hand, if the husband, after receiving notice from
his wife, should send guards, this would not cause any prejudice to himself. He
will, therefore, be permitted to deny that the child is his, nor will it
prejudice him, because he placed a watch over the woman.
This opinion is also stated by Marcellus in the Seventh Book of the Digest, for
he says that if a party denies that a woman is his wife, or that she is
pregnant by him, he can, without any prejudice to himself, very properly send
persons to watch her, especially if he makes protest at the time that he does
so.
(12) Julianus says in the Nineteenth Book of the Digest, that it is stated in
the Decree of the Senate that if the woman should notify her husband that she
had conceived by him, and he, after having been notified, should not send
persons to watch or examine her, and does not declare in the presence of
witnesses that she is not pregnant by him, he will be compelled to recognize
the child when it is born; but it does not follow from this that if he says
that the child is his, he must make it his heir if it was begotten by someone
else. Still, he holds that when the case is heard in court, the admission of
the father will establish a strong presumption in favor of the child.
(13) He also says that, on the other hand, where the woman, after a divorce has
taken place, does not comply with what was prescribed by the Decree of the
Senate, the father has the right not to acknowledge the child; and that it does
not follow from this that, after the child is born, it cannot be declared to be
his, but merely that the father will not be compelled to support it, if it
should be proved to be his own offspring.
(14) Julianus also says that if a woman notifies her husband that she is
pregnant, and he does not deny it, it must not be concluded from this that the
child is his, although he can be compelled to support it. It would, however, be
very unjust if, where a man has been absent for a long time, and having
returned, finds his wife pregnant, and for this reason repudiates her, and he
neglects to comply with any of the provisions of the Decree of the Senate, the
child should be his heir.
(15) It is apparent from what has been said, that the child is in no way
prejudiced, if the wife should fail to observe any of the provisions of the
Decree of the Senate, when the child in fact belongs to her husband --- and this
not merely has reference to its rights, nor
indeed to its maintenance, according to a Rescript of the Divine Pius; or if
the husband has neglected to do what is prescribed by the Decree of the Senate,
he can certainly be compelled to support the child, but he can repudiate it.
(16) It is clear that, if, after the woman has notified her husband, he should
deny that she is pregnant by him, even though he may not send persons to watch
her, he cannot prevent an examination being made to ascertain whether the woman
is pregnant by him, or not. If this case is brought into court, and a decision
be rendered on the point as to whether or not the woman is pregnant by her
husband, the child must be recognized by the husband, whether it belongs to
him, or not.

2. Julianus, Digest, Book XIX.
This applies to all cases, and therefore the child will be related by blood to
its brothers.

3. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIV.
If, on the other hand, the judge should decide that the child does not belong
to the husband, even though it is really his, it is settled that a decision of
this kind is equivalent to law.
This opinion Marcellus approves in the Seventh Book of the Digest, and we make
use of it at the present time.
(1) For the reason that the Plautian Decree of the Senate has reference to
children born after a divorce, another Decree of the Senate was enacted during
the reign of the Divine Hadrian, which prescribed that children born during
marriage must be recognized by their parents.
(2) But what if a child should be born after the death of its father, and
during the lifetime of its grandfather, under whose control it would be placed,
if it should be proved that the said child is the issue of the son of the
grandfather? It should be considered what must be held in this instance. The
opinion should be adopted that the question of its recognition should be left
to its grandfather.
(3) But what if, in this case, the question should arise whether the child was
born during marriage, or subsequently? It must be said that proceedings should
be taken in accordance with the Decree of the Senate for the determination of
this point.
(4) And what should be done if it was denied that the woman was the wife of the
alleged husband? Julianus informed Sextus Cौcilius Africanus that there was
ground for a preliminary inquiry.
(5) It must be held that these Decrees of the Senate are not applicable after
the death of the father, if there is no relative under whose control the child
can be placed. What claim to the estate could a child in this instance assert?
Could he make such a claim, whether he was begotten by the person whose estate
he demands, or not? What Julianus wrote in the Nineteenth Book of the Digest is
true to the extent that, if proceedings for the recognition of the child had
been begun during the lifetime of the father, and the latter should die
before a decision was rendered, recourse must be had to the Carbonian Edict.
(6) These decrees of the Senate also have reference to children who are born
their own heirs. The better opinion is, however, that they are not applicable
where the child, whose recognition is in question, was not under the control of
the party instituting the proceedings.

4. Paulus, Opinions, Book II.
Not only he who smothers a child is hold to kill it, but also he who abandons
it, or denies it food, as well as he who exposes it in a public place for the
purpose of exciting pity, which he himself does not feel.

5. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Consul, Book II.
Where anyone asks support of his children, or where children can be supported
by their father, a judge should take cognizance of the matter.
(1) Should a father be compelled to support only such children as are under his
control, or should he support those who are already emancipated, or who, for
any other reason, have become independent, is a question for consideration. I
think the better opinion is that even where the children are not under paternal
control, they must be supported by their parents, and that, on the other hand,
their parents should also be supported by them.
(2) Let us see whether we are obliged to support only our fathers, our paternal
grandfathers, our paternal great-grandfathers and other relatives of the male
sex; or whether we are obliged to support our mothers, and our other ascendants
in the maternal line. The better opinion is, that in every instance, the judge
should interpose for the purpose of giving relief to the necessities of some
and the infirmities of others; and since this obligation is derived from
justice, and from the attachment due to blood, the judge should carefully weigh
the claims of each of the parties.
(3) It must be said that the same rule applies to the maintenance of children
by their parents.
(4) Therefore we compel a mother to support her illegitimate children, and them
to support her.
(5) The Divine Pius also intimates that a maternal grandfather is obliged to
support his grandchildren.
(6) He also stated in a Rescript that a father must support his daughter, if it
should be proved in court that he had actually begotten her.
(7) Where a son can support himself, the court should decide not to compel
maintenance to be furnished him. Hence the Emperor Pius stated in a Rescript:
"The competent judges and before whom you will appear, must order that you
shall be supported by your father in proportion to his means; provided that you
allege that you are an artisan, and that by reason of ill health, you cannot
maintain yourself by your own labor."
(8) Where a father denies that a party asking for support is his son, and
therefore contends that he should not furnish it; or where a son denies that an
applicant for maintenance is his father, the judges must decide the case
summarily, and if it is established that the petitioner is a son, or a father,
they must then order him to be supported. If, however, this should not be
proved, they shall not decide that maintenance shall be furnished.
(9) But it must be remembered that if the judges hold that support should be
furnished, still, this does not prejudice the truth, for they do not decide
that the party is a son, but merely that he should be supported. This the
Divine Marcus also stated in a Rescript.
(10) If anyone should refuse to provide support, the judges must determine the
amount to be furnished in proportion to his means, and if he still fails to
provide it, he can be compelled to comply with the judgment by taking his
property in execution and selling the same.
(11) The judge must also determine whether a relative or a father has any good
reason for refusing to support his children. There is a rescript addressed to
Trebatius Marinus which states that a father can properly refuse to support his
son if the latter has informed against him.
(12) It is stated in certain rescripts that a father can be compelled by a
judge not only to furnish provisions, but also all other necessaries to his
children.
(13) Where a son has been emancipated before arriving at puberty, he can be
compelled to support his father, if the latter is in poverty; for anyone would
say with reason that it is most unjust for a father to remain in want, while
his son was in prosperous circumstances.
(14) Where a mother who furnished provisions to her child, brings suit against
its father, she should be heard under certain conditions; for the Divine Marcus
stated in a Rescript addressed to Antonia Montana: "The judges will estimate
how much shall be paid to you by the father of your daughter in proportion to
the amount of necessary provisions which you have furnished her for her
support; but you cannot obtain as much as you would have expended for your
daughter through maternal affection, even if she had been driven away by her
father."
(15) Filial affection requires that parents should be supported by a son who is
in the military service, provided he has the means to do so.
(16) It is stated in a rescript that, although a parent should, according to
the dictates of nature, be supported by his son, still the latter ought not to
be required to pay his debts.
(17) There is also a rescript which states that the heirs of the son, if
unwilling, are not compelled to furnish such assistance to their father that a
son while living would provide him with through motives of filial duty, unless
the father is in the greatest poverty.
(18) Judges are also accustomed to decide between patrons and freedmen, where
the question of their maintenance arises. Therefore, if the patrons deny that
the claimants are their freedmen, the judges must make inquiry, and if it is
proved that they are their freedmen, then they must order them to be supported.
The decree for support does not, however, prevent the freedman (if he denies
that he is such) from contending for his rights against his patron.
(19) Support must be furnished by freedmen to their patrons who are in poverty
in proportion to their means. If, however, the latter are able to support
themselves, the authority of the judge need not be interposed.
(20) The question may be asked whether only patrons are to be supported, or
whether their children must also be maintained. I think that, upon proper cause
being shown, judges should decree that the children of patrons should also be
supported, not indeed as readily as patrons, but sometimes; for freedmen should
show reverence not only to their patrons but also to the children of the
latter.
(21) The freedman of a woman is compelled to support her children.
(22) If anyone should desire to be supported by a freedman of his freedman, or
by a slave whom he has manumitted by reason of a trust, or by one whom he has
redeemed from slavery with his own money, he should not be heard. For, as
Marcellus says, he should be compared with one who, by exacting a reward, loses
thereby the rights he has in a freedman.
(23) If the son of his patron has accused the freedman of his father of a
capital crime, he denies that the latter is required to support him.
(24) A freedwoman is also obliged to support her patron.
(25) An arbiter is usually appointed to decide with reference to the support of
a patron, and he must ascertain the value of the resources of the freedman, in
order that the amount of the maintenance may be determined, and this must be
provided as long as the freedman is able to do so, and the patron requires it.
(26) Freedmen are compelled to furnish support for the father and mother of
their patron, where the patron and his children are no longer living, if they
are in need, and the freedmen have the means to do so.

6. Modestinus, Concerning Manumissions.
The patron, by refusing to furnish support at the request of his freedman,
forfeits the privileges imposed in his favor upon the latter on account of his
manumission, and he is punished by the loss of the estate of the freedman; but
he is not required to furnish support, even if he is able to do so.
(1) A Constitution of the Emperor Commodus contains the following: "Where it is
proved that a patron has been rudely treated by his freedman, or severely
beaten by him, or abandoned while in poverty or while suffering from bodily
illness; he must first be brought again
under the control of his patron, and compelled to render services to him as his
master, and if he does not take warning by this proceeding, he shall be sold to
a purchaser under the authority of a magistrate, and his price given to his
patron".

7. The Same, Opinions, Book V.
If he who is alleged to have been the husband of a woman denies that the
marriage was contracted, for the reason that he is ready to prove that she who
claims to be his wife is a slave, he shall be compelled to support her children
in the meantime; but if it should be established that she was a slave, he who
was charged with their support will not be prejudiced on this account.

8. Marcellus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book I.
The children of our male children are under our care, but this is not the case
with those descended from females; for it is evident that a child whom a
daughter brings forth is under the care of her father, and not of her
grandfather, unless the father is not living, or is in want.

9. Paulus, On the Right of Patronage.
Patrons and their children have no right to the property of their surviving
freedmen, unless they prove to the court that they are so weak or poor that
they should be assisted with monthly contributions of food by their freedmen.
This rule has been established by many Imperial Constitutions.


* 25.4. CONCERNING THE EXAMINATION OF PREGNANT WOMEN, AND THE
  PRECAUTIONS TO BE TAKEN WITH REFERENCE TO THEIR DELIVERY.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIV.
In the time of the Divine Brothers a husband appeared who stated that his wife
was pregnant, but she denied it, and the Emperors having been consulted on the
subject, addressed a Rescript to Valerius Priscianus, the Urban Prौtor, in the
following terms. "Rutilius Severus seems to ask for something extraordinary in
applying for a custodian for his wife, who is divorced from him, and who
asserts that she is not pregnant. Therefore, no one will be surprised if We
also suggest a new plan and a remedy. If the husband persists in his demand, it
will be most convenient for the house of a respectable woman to be chosen into
which Domitia may go, and that three midwives, experienced in their profession
and trustworthy, after having been selected by you, shall examine her. And if
all of them, or only two, announce that she seems to be pregnant, then the
woman must be persuaded to receive a custodian, just as if she herself had
requested it. If she does not bring forth a child, her husband will know that
he will incur dishonor, and that his reputation will be involved, and he will
not unreasonably be held to
have contrived this in order to injure his wife. If, however, all of said
women, or the majority of them, declare that the woman is not pregnant, there
will be no reason for the appointment of a custodian."
(1) It is perfectly evident from this rescript that the Decrees of the Senate
relating to the recognition of children will not apply, if the woman pretended
that she was pregnant, or even denied that this was the case. Nor is this
unreasonable, for the child is a part of the woman, or of her entrails, before
it is born. After it is born, however, it is clear that the husband can, in
accordance with his rights, by means of an interdict, demand that the child
shall be produced in his presence, or that he shall be permitted by an
extraordinary proceeding to remove it. Therefore the Emperor comes to his
relief when it is necessary.
(2) In accordance with this rescript, a woman may be summoned before the Prौtor
and, having been interrogated as to whether she believes that she is pregnant,
can be compelled to answer.
(3) What must be done in case she should not answer, or should not appear
before the Prौtor? Shall we apply the penalty fixed by the Decree of the
Senate, namely, that the husband shall have the right not to acknowledge the
child? But suppose that the husband is not content with this, and that he
should prefer to be a father rather than be deprived of his son? Then the woman
shall be compelled by the authority of the Prौtor to come into court, and if
she does come, to answer; and if she refuses, her property shall be taken in
execution, and sold, or she shall be punished by a fine.
(4) But what if, having been interrogated, she should say that she is pregnant?
The course prescribed by the Decree of the Senate must then be followed. If,
however, she should deny that she is pregnant, then, in accordance with this
rescript, the Prौtor must summon midwives.
(5) It should be noted that neither the husband nor the wife is permitted to
summon midwives, but they must all be summoned by the Prौtor.
(6) The Prौtor also must select the house of the respectable matron to which
the woman must go, in order that she may be examined.
(7) What must be done if the woman will not permit herself to be examined, or
refuses to go to the house? Under these circumstances, the authority of the
Prौtor must also be invoked.
(8) If all, or a majority of the midwives, declare that the woman is not
pregnant, can she bring an action on the ground of injury committed? I think
that the better opinion is, that she can bring such an action, provided,
however, that her husband, by taking this course, desired to cause her injury.
But if he had no intention to injure her, but, indeed, actually believed that
she was pregnant, having been influenced by an extreme desire to have children,
or because she herself induced him to think so, having during marriage
pretended that this was the case, it will be perfectly just for the husband to
be excused.
(9) Moreover, it should be remembered that no time has been fixed by the
rescript, although in the Decrees of the Senate relating to the
recognition of children, the term of thirty days was established for the woman
to announce her pregnancy. What then should be done? Shall we say that the
husband can always summon his wife before the Prौtor or shall we appoint thirty
days for him to do so? I think that, where proper cause is shown, the Prौtor
should also hear the husband after thirty days have elapsed.
(10) With reference to the examination of a pregnant woman, and the precautions
to be taken at the time of delivery, the Prौtor says: "If a woman, after the
death of her husband, declares that she is pregnant, she must take care to
notify the parties interested or their agent, twice within the month subsequent
to his death, so that they may send persons to examine her, if they wish to do
so. Free women to the number of five shall be sent, and all of them shall make
the examination at one time, but none, while they are making the examination,
shall touch the belly of the woman without her consent. The woman shall be
delivered in the house of a respectable matron, whom I will appoint. Thirty
days before she expects to be confined, she shall notify the parties interested
or their agents to send persons to be present at her delivery, if they should
desire to do so. There shall only be one entrance to the room where the woman
is to be delivered and if there are more, they shall be closed by means of
boards. Before the door of this room, three freemen and three freewomen,
together with two companions, shall keep watch. Every time that the said woman
enters this room, or any other, or goes to the bath, the custodians can
previously make an examination of it, if they wish to do so, and also search
any parties who may enter therein. The custodians who are placed in front of
the room may search all persons who enter it or the house, if they so desire.
"When the woman begins to bring forth her child, she must notify all the
parties interested, or their agents, in order that they may send persons to be
present at her delivery. Freewomen to the number of five shall be sent, so that
in addition to two midwives there shall not be present in the said room more
than ten freewomen, nor more than six female slaves. All those who are to be
present in the room shall be searched, for fear one of them may be pregnant.
There shall not be less than three lights in said room, for the reason that
darkness is better adapted for the substitution of a child. When the child is
born, it shall be shown to the parties interested, or to their agents, if they
desire to inspect it.
"It shall be brought up by whomever its father shall designate. If the father
gives no directions in this respect, or the person by whom he desires it to be
brought up will not take charge of it, this shall be done by someone appointed
by me, after proper cause is shown. The person by whom the child is to be
reared shall produce it, after it has reached the age of three months, twice
every month until it is six months old; and then once a month, and from the
time it is six months old until it has attained the age of a year, it shall be
produced every other month; and after it is a year old, until it can speak, he
shall exhibit it once every six months, wherever he wishes to do so.
"If the parties interested are not permitted to examine the woman, and to watch
her, or to be present at her delivery, and anything is done to prevent what is
set forth above, I will not grant permission for the possession of the child
after I have taken cognizance of the case, nor will I do so where the child is
not allowed to be examined, as is hereinbefore provided. Where it seems to me
that a good reason exists, I will not grant those actions which I promise to
those to whom the possession of property has been given in accordance with my
Edict".
(11) Although the Edict of the Prौtor is perfectly clear, still its
interpretation should not be neglected.
(12) Hence, the woman should give notice to the parties interested, that is to
say, to those whose interest it is that she should have no children, or to
those who are entitled to the entire estate or a part of the same, whether as
heirs at law, or under a will.
(13) If, however, a slave has been appointed heir, and there are no children;
Aristo states that in this case it is in the power of the Prौtor to permit him
to take not all, but some of the precautions with reference to the delivery.
I think that this opinion is correct. For it is to the interest of the public
that there should be no substitution of a child, in order that the honor of
persons of rank, as well as that of families, may be preserved. Therefore,
where a slave of this kind has been appointed with the expectation of the
succession, he should be heard; no matter what his standing is, since he is
acting both in the public interest and his own.
(14) Moreover, those also must be notified who are next in the line of
succession; as, for instance, the heir appointed in the first degree, but not
one who has been substituted; and if the head of the family died intestate,
those should be notified who hold the first place in the line of succession.
Where, however, there are several who have the right to succeed at the same
time, all of them should be notified.
(15) Again, where the Prौtor says that he will not grant possession after
having taken cognizance of the case, or that he will refuse certain actions,
this has reference to a case where, through ignorance, some provision has been
neglected of those which the Prौtor wished to be observed; but this does not
prejudice the rights of the child. For what kind of a rule would it be if one
of the trifling formalities which the Prौtor declares must be observed should
not be carried out, and the possession of the property be refused to the child?
The custom of the neighborhood must be followed, and in accordance with it the
woman must be examined, and the delivery and the child watched.
2. Julianus, Digest, Book XXIV.
The Edict having reference to the inspection of pregnant women conflicts with
the one granted in accordance with the provisions of the Carbonian Decree.
(1) Sometimes, however, the Prौtor should dispense with these formalities,
where the examination of the woman does not take place, or her delivery is not
watched, and this occurs not through her malice but through her ignorance.
3. Paulus, On Plautius, Book XIV.
Where anyone is substituted for an unborn child, or is appointed heir in case
there are no children, and he wishes to have the woman watched, he should be
heard.
4. Scौvola, Digest, Book XX.
A certain man by whom it was provided that, if he died without issue, whatever
came into his hands should be left in charge of his sister as trustee, died
after having appointed a posthumous heir, to whom he substituted others. The
question arose whether the sister or her agent should be permitted to examine
the woman, and watch over her delivery, in accordance with the terms of the
Edict, since the wife of the deceased declared herself to be pregnant. I
answered that in a case of the kind with reference to which the inquiry was
made, it could be held that the solicitude manifested by the person charged
with the trust ought to be respected, and that the request should be granted,
if proper cause was shown.


* 25.5. WHERE A WOMAN IS PLACED IN POSSESSION OF THE ESTATE OF HER
  HUSBAND IN THE NAME OF HER UNBORN CHILD, AND THIS POSSESSION IS SAID
  TO HAVE BEEN FRAUDULENTLY TRANSFERRED TO ANOTHER.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIV.
The Prौtor has most properly provided by this Edict that the possession which
he promises in favor of an unborn child shall not give occasion to the
depredations of others.
(1) He, therefore, establishes an action against a woman who fraudulently
transfers this possession to another. For not only does he exercise his
authority over the woman herself, but also over anyone under whose control she
may be; that is to say, where another is allowed to obtain possession through
their fraudulent acts, and he promises an action against them to the extent of
the interest of the party who institutes the proceedings.
(2) The Prौtor necessarily adds that where anyone has fraudulently obtained
possession of the property he shall be compelled to relinquish it. He will,
however, compel him to do this not through the authority of his office, or by
means of his subordinates, but he attains his object better, and more in
accordance with the Civil Law when, by means of an interdict, he compels the
party in question to have recourse to the ordinary procedure.
(3) It is to the interest of him who institutes the proceedings, that another
should not be allowed to obtain possession when the latter has consumed the
income collected in good faith, or when a depredator has obtained possession,
and the income cannot be recovered from him, for the reason that he is
insolvent.
(4) This action will be granted even after the expiration of a year, because
its object is the recovery of the property.
(5) If the woman who has committed the fraud is under paternal control, an
action will be granted against her father, if any of the property has come into
his hands.
2. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXVII.
A woman acts fraudulently who does not prevent another party from obtaining
possession; or for the purpose of defrauding anyone, places another in
possession clandestinely, and by means of some artifice.
(1) If fraud is proved to have been committed by the father and the daughter,
an action can be brought against either of them whom the plaintiff may select;
because it is granted in favor of the party in interest. Therefore he can
recover anything which he may have lost from the woman who is under paternal
control, but this action will not be available to him beyond the expenses
incurred by the prosecution of the case.


* 25.6. WHERE A WOMAN IS SAID TO HAVE OBTAINED POSSESSION OF THE
  ESTATE OF HER HUSBAND IN THE NAME OF HER UNBORN CHILD, BY HAVING
  MADE A FALSE STATEMENT.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIV.
Where possession is demanded by a woman in the name of her unborn child, and
the oath having been tendered by the heir she swears that she is pregnant, the
oath must be upheld, and she will not be liable on the ground that she has
obtained possession through a false statement, nor shall any compulsion be
applied to her after she has been sworn.
If, however, she should bring forth a child, an inquiry can be made as to
whether it is true that she was pregnant by her husband; for where an oath is
taken between two persons, it cannot profit a third party, nor prejudice the
rights of the others. Nor, under such circumstances, will the rights of the
child be prejudiced.
(1) This Edict is based upon the same principle as the former one, for the
Prौtor, as it is easy to grant the woman possession of the estate in the name
of her unborn child, should not fail to punish her false statement.
(2) A woman is held to have obtained possession fraudulently, who attempts to
obtain possession being well aware that she is not pregnant.
(3) The Prौtor promises this action within the available year, but not beyond
it, because it is of the nature of a penal one.
(4) In like manner, in this instance the Prौtor promises an action for the
recovery of the amount of the interest of the plaintiff.
(5) The Prौtor also promises this action against the father of the woman,
provided it was by his act that she fraudulently obtained possession.
(6) This action can be brought by anyone whose interest it is that a woman
should not be placed in possession of the estate; as, for example, either by a
co-heir, who is waiting for a child to be born, or a person who has been
substituted, or one who would inherit ab intestato if the woman should die.
(7) The interest of the plaintiff is, first of all, held to have reference to
the maintenance which is claimed by the woman on the ground of her pregnancy;
for nothing can be recovered on this account, unless the woman obtained
possession of the estate through fraudulent representation. If, however, there
was no fraudulent representation, she will not be compelled to pay anything,
because she obtained support, without any reason, under the pretext of her
pregnancy.
(8) Sometimes, the amount of the interest is increased, where, for instance,
the heir being in doubt as to the woman's pregnancy, is excluded from the
estate. For Julianus says that this action should be granted to the heir who is
excluded, if it was to his interest that the woman should not fraudulently
obtain possession; because if this were not the case, the appointed heir, by
entering upon the estate, would leave a more valuable inheritance to his own
heir. The woman could also be blamed for the diminution of the value of the
estate, as the heir did not accept it on account of the prospect of the birth
of a child.
(9) Julianus also says in the Nineteenth Book of the Digest, that if an heir,
who has been substituted, should die while the woman is in possession of the
estate, his heir can collect its value from the woman by means of the same
action.
(10) But it should be considered whether the legacies and other charges of the
estate should be relinquished by the woman; and it seems to me that it can be
held that the legatees have a right to avail themselves of this action against
her, because it is to their interest that the estate should be entered upon.
(11) It is clear that relief must be given to slaves who have been liberated,
as against the party who has brought this action in behalf of the estate; that
is to say, that he shall be compelled to discharge the trust, as he has
received their value.
I think, however, that the Prौtor should come to the relief of those who have
been directly manumitted, and by his intervention should maintain their
freedom.
(12) Where fraud exists on the part of a woman under paternal control, and her
father has participated in it, he will be liable in his own name.



* 25.7. CONCERNING CONCUBINES.

1. Ulpianus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book II.
Where a freedwoman is living in concubinage with her patron, she can leave him
without his consent, and unite with another man, either in matrimony or in
concubinage. I think, however, that a concubine should not have the right to
marry if she leaves her patron without his consent, since it is more honorable
for a freedwoman to be the concubine of a patron than to become the mother of a
family.
(1) I hold with Atilicinus, that only those women who are not disgraced by such
a connection can be kept in concubinage without the fear of committing a crime.
(2) Where a man keeps in concubinage a woman who has been convicted of
adultery, I do not think that the Lex Julia de Adulteriis will be applicable,
although he will be liable if he should marry her.
(3) If a woman has lived in concubinage with her patron, and then maintains the
same relation with his son or grandson, I do not think that she is acting
properly, because a connection of this kind closely approaches one that is
infamous, and therefore such scandalous conduct should be prohibited.
(4) It is clear that anyone can keep a concubine of any age unless she is less
than twelve years old.

2. Paulus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book XII.
Where a patron, who has a freedwoman as his concubine, becomes insane, it is
more equitable to hold that she remains in concubinage.

3. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XII.
The freedwoman of another can be kept in concubinage as well as a woman who is
born free, and this is especially the case where she is of a low origin, or has
lived by prostitution; otherwise if a man prefers to keep a woman of
respectable character and who is free born in concubinage, it is evident that
he can not be permitted to do so without openly stating the fact in the
presence of witnesses; but it will be necessary for him either to marry her,
or if he refuses, to subject her to disgrace.
(1) Adultery is not committed by a party who lives with a concubine because
concubinage obtains its name from the law, and does not involve a legal
penalty; as Marcellus states in the Seventh Book of the Digest.

4. Paulus, Opinions, Book XIX.
The woman must be considered a concubine even where only the intention to live
with her is manifested.
5. The Same, Opinions, Book II.
An official who is a resident of the province where he administers the duties
of his office can keep a concubine.1
1 Concubinage was legalized by the laws of Rome, as it was by those of many
other nations of antiquity. A bachelor or a widower was permitted to keep a
mis-
