# -*- mode: org -*-

THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS. BOOK XXII.


BOOK XXII.
TITLE I.
CONCERNING INTERESTS, PROFITS, ADDITIONS, AND ALL ACCESSORIES AND DEFAULT
.................................................... 207
TITLE II. CONCERNING MARITIME INTEREST .................................. 222
TITLE III. CONCERNING PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS ........................... 224
TITLE IV. CONCERNING THE AUTHENTICITY OF INSTRUMENTS AND THEIR LOSS .... 231
TITLE V. CONCERNING WITNESSES .......................................... 232
TITLE VI. CONCERNING IGNORANCE OF LAW AND FACT......................... 237


TITLE I.
CONCERNING INTERESTS, PROFITS, ADDITIONS, AND ALL ACCESSORIES AND DEFAULT.

1. Papinianus, Questions, Book III.
Where a judgment is rendered in good faith, the rate of interest is determined
by the decision of the court, according to the custom of the place where the
contract was made, provided the amount does not exceed that fixed by law.1

[[ 1 At Common Law, interest could not be collected, hence it is now,
necessarily, entirely regulated by statute. The rule set forth in the
text generally prevails in England and the United States, but the
provision against an excessive rate is not always observed. Unless the
place of payment is specified, which is usually the case, both
principal and interest are payable anywhere. Where the place is
designated and the rate is not, only the interest authorized by the
law of that State can be exacted, except where judgment is taken by
default. (VideByles on Bills, page 386. Parsons on Contracts, II, II.)
Authorities, however, do not agree upon some of these points, and many
conflicting decisions exist. The better opinion probably is that the
lex loci (where the contract was executed), governs, even though the
rate be higher than that of the place of payment. Some jurists hold
that the law of either place is applicable. Where no definite
conclusion can be arrived at, the intention of the parties should, if
possible, be ascertained. (Kent, Commentaries on American Law, V,
XXXIX.) --- ED.]]

(1) If a partner should have judgment rendered against him on account of his
having misappropriated the funds of the partnership, and converted them to his
own use, he must, by all means, pay interest on the same, even if he was not in
default.
(2) However, a judge who is to preside in a bona fide action cannot properly
order security to be given by the defendant that, if he loses the case, he will
pay interest until the judgment is satisfied, since it is in the power of the
plaintiff to cause execution to be issued. Paulus states in a note that it is
not part of the duty of the judge to concern himself with what takes place
after a decision has been rendered.
(3) Papinianus says a broader interpretation should be given with reference to
restitution made by a guardian in favor of his ward. For no one now doubts that
when a guardian renders his account he must pay interest up to the time that he
makes restitution, whether the judge receives it up to the day that the
decision was rendered, or whether this is done out of court. It is clear that
where the ward declines to institute proceedings in an action on guardianship,
and the guardian voluntarily enters into an agreement with him, tenders him the
money, and deposits it in a sealed bag, he will not be liable for interest from
that time.

2. The Same, Questions, Book VI.
It is generally settled that although a personal action may be brought after
issue has been joined, liability attaches to all the accessories to the
property. The reason for this opinion is, that the property ought to be
delivered in the same condition in which it was when suit was brought for its
recovery, and therefore, that all crops that have been obtained, and any
offspring born of slaves must be surrendered.

3. The Same, Questions, Book XX.
In the case of a demand made upon a surety where an heir was in default after a
judicial decision had been rendered, the Emperor Marcus Antoninus ordered that
where the time established by law in favor of parties who had lost their cases
had elapsed, the surety could recover everything which had been acquired by his
principal up to the time of the judgment. This decree must be understood to
apply where the party had not been in default before the decision of the judge,
although it cannot readily happen that recourse may be had to the
court where default has not previously taken place; for instance, where the
principle of the Lex Falcidia becomes applicable. If, however, the heir is in
default before application is made to the judge, he being liable for the
delivery of the profits from that time; for which reason, as he has already
lost the case, will he be released from liability for the profits after the
lapse of the time fixed by law, since that period is granted him for the
purpose of satisfying the judgment, and not for obtaining any advantage for
himself?
(1) In proceedings of this kind which are not subject to arbitration, and are
not bona fide actions, after issue has been joined, everything connected with
the property for which suit is brought must be delivered to the plaintiff, up
to the time of the judgment. It is certain that the party will be free from
liability for the profits after a decision
has been rendered.
(2) It sometimes happens that although the profits of an estate or the interest
on money is not expressly bequeathed, it is, nevertheless due; as, for example,
where anyone requests that any of his property should be left after his death,
it shall be delivered to Titius; for as diminutions made in good faith are not
included in this trust, if proportionate diminutions of other property should
have taken place, any remaining profits must be given up in accordance with the
will
of the testator.
(3) Pollidius, having been appointed heir to one of his female relatives, was
asked by her to deliver to the daughter of the woman, when she had reached a
certain age, any property belonging to her estate which might come into his
hands; and the mother stated in her will that she had decided upon this step to
prevent the property from being placed under the control of guardians, and that
she preferred that a near relative should have charge of it. She directed the
said Pollidius to retain a certain tract of land for himself, and I stated to
the Praetorian Prefect that all the profits which had been acquired in good
faith from the property of the deceased by Pollidius should be delivered, not
only because the mother had left to him the tract of land, but also for the
reason that she had preferred this method of creating a trust to the less
reliable one of guardianship.
(4) Where manufactured gold or silver is left in trust, and default takes
place, a discussion usually arises as to whether an estimate of interest should
be made. It is evident that if the testator left the metal of which the
articles were composed with the intention that it should be sold, and the trust
discharged by means of the money obtained, or that maintenance should be
furnished; it must be held that any fraudulent conduct of the heir should not
go unpunished. If, however, the testator left the vases to be used by his heir,
it would be improper for interest to be demanded, and therefore it can not be
exacted.

4. The Same, Questions, Book XXVII.  If you make a stipulation, "For
property to be given to you, and complete possession of the same to be
delivered," reason suggests that you should afterwards obtain the
profits of said property which have been collected by having recourse
to a general action on stipulation, on account of the last words of
the clause.  It should be considered whether the same rule will apply
to the offspring of a female slave in a case of this kind; for, with
reference to the first words of the clause, whether they relate to the
fact of the property being promised, or to the effect of the delivery
by the transfer of ownership, offspring is not included. But if the
purchaser, with the intention of renewing the obligation, stipulated
with the vendor in this way, the fact of the delivery was understood
to be agreed upon, for the reason that it is not probable that the
vendor promised more than he would be compelled to furnish in an
action on purchase.  Still, on account of the words, "And complete
possession to be delivered," it can be held that the accounting for
the offspring becomes operative on account of the stipulation being
general in its character; for after the female slave has been
delivered, the party to the stipulation would be entitled to include
any child subsequently born on his premises.

(1) Where a child is born to a female slave after the sale has been contracted,
but before the stipulation has been entered into, or any property is acquired
by the vendor through the agency of the slave, he can recover it by means of an
action on purchase; but he cannot do so by means of an action based on the
stipulation, for whatever is not transferred to a new obligation can be
recovered under the former right.

5. The Same, Questions, Book XXVIII.
It is proper to generally state that, in a bona fide action, no guarantee which
is contrary to good morals will be accepted.
6. The Same, Questions, Book XXIX.
Where a controversy arose with an heir, which had reference to a transaction
involving the property of a father or master, and the question of interest was
discussed, the Emperor Antoninus decided that interest should be paid, for the
reason that the master himself or the father had paid it for a long time.
(1) Our Emperor Severus also ordered that the sum of ten thousand sesterces
should be paid out of the Treasury by way of dowry, to the daughter of Flavius
Athenagoras, whose property had been confiscated, because she alleged that her
father had paid her interest on her dowry.
7. The Same, Opinions, Book II.
A debtor, who owed a sum of money bearing interest, tendered the amount to his
creditor, and when the latter refused to accept it, he placed it in a bag, and
sealed and deposited it. Reason demands that from this day there should be no
interest due. If, however, suit should afterwards be brought to compel the
debtor to pay, and he should fail to do so, the money will not be idle from
that time.
8. The Same, Opinions, Book VII.
Where horses have been left in trust, after default, the first foal must be
furnished as profit, but a second one as accessory, just as in the case of the
offspring of a female slave.
9. The Same, Opinions, Book XL
Where money was lent at interest, and double the amount was contracted for if
it should not be paid within a certain time; I gave the opinion that the debtor
is not liable for anything more than the legal rate of interest; hence the
stipulation will be operative in proportion to the time which has elapsed after
a deduction has been made of the
surplus interest.
(1) The stipulation for interest becomes operative even though the debtor may
not be sued; nor is a stipulation for legal interest held to be void where it
is made under the condition that it will be due if interest at a lower rate
should not be paid at the appointed time, for it is not a penalty, but a higher
rate of interest that is promised for a lawful reason. Where, however, there
was no one to whom the money could be paid after the death of the creditor, it
is established that the debtor is not in default during that time. Therefore,
if a higher rate of interest is demanded, and was agreed upon in the first
place, an exception on the ground of bad faith can properly be interposed.
10. Paulus, Questions, Book II.
The possessor should surrender a child born to a female slave after issue has
been joined, but he is not obliged to give it up if it was born before
proceedings were instituted for the recovery of the mother, unless the
plaintiff expressly brought the suit for said child.
11. The Same, Questions, Book XXV.
Gaius Seius, who was in the habit of transacting public business, lent money
belonging to the Government at the ordinary rate of interest, but the custom
existed to exact a higher rate where the interest was not paid within a certain
time. Some of the debtors were in default in paying their interest, others paid
more than they owed, and the result was that everything due by way of interest
was made up, even that of those who had failed to pay anything.
The question arose whether the surplus interest which was collected from some
of the debtors, by way of penalty, according to the prevalent custom, should
profit Seius himself, or should enure to the benefit of the Government? I
answered that if Gaius Seius stipulated for interest from the debtors, that
alone must be paid to the Government which, according to the rule, it was
customary to collect from them, even though all the claims were good.
(1) What if a public slave should have obtained an obligation bearing interest
for the benefit of the Government? It is just that, although by law this
interest should be due to the Government, still, on account of certain claims
which are bad, a set-off of the surplus interest should
be made, if the Government was not prepared to seize the property of all the
debtors. Marcellus states almost the same opinion with reference to guardians.
12. The Same, Opinions, Book XII.
Seia borrowed money from Septitius, and it was agreed with reference to the
interest: "That unless the above-mentioned interest was paid at the different
times specified, or within three months, Seia would then be liable for a higher
rate, and afterwards, at each payment, if the interest was not forthcoming in
accordance with the prescribed condition, the said condition should be observed
until the entire sum due was paid." I ask whether the following words, "And
afterwards, at each payment, if the interest is not forthcoming, in accordance
with the prescribed condition, the said condition shall be observed," mean that
even though the first stipulation may become operative, still, the debtor
cannot be sued for a larger amount of interest than was due at the time
appointed for the first payment, when she was in default. Paulus answered that
the stipulation contains several conditions, and that it is subject to the
payment of a higher rate of interest; that is to say, that the condition should
be considered with reference to each payment of a lower rate of interest which
should have been, but was not made at the proper time, and therefore that the
penalty for subsequent payment could be avoided.
13. Scaevola, Opinions, Book I.
Where a debtor promised to pay interest at six per cent, and for many years
paid interest at a lower rate, and the heir of the creditor brought suit for
six per cent, although the debtor had done nothing to avoid payment at the
lower rate, I ask whether an exception on the ground of bad faith, or one based
on the contract can be interposed? I answered that, if the debtor had not been
in default in paying the lower rate of interest, according to his custom, for
so long a time, an exception could be interposed in accordance with the facts
stated.
(1) The question arose whether an agent should pay interest on idle money, if
his principal was not in a habit of lending money at interest, where an action
has been brought on the ground of voluntary agency, or on that of mandate? The
answer was that, if he had held the money on deposit and had done this in
accordance with the custom of the mandator, he would not be obliged to pay
anything by way of interest.
14. Paulus, Opinions, Book XIV.
Paulus gave it as his opinion that where a party is in default in discharging a
trust, the offspring of female slaves must be given up.
(1) An heir was requested to surrender the estate to someone without the income
from the same after his death. The question arose whether the offspring of
female slaves, even if born during the lifetime of the heir, should be given
up, on account of the words of the will by which the testator intended to
indicate that the income alone of the
estate should be reserved. Paulus answered that any children born to female
slaves before the trust became operative, were not included therein. Neratius
also says in the First Book that where an heir was requested to deliver a
female slave he is not required to deliver her offspring, unless the child was
born while he was in default in discharging the trust. Nor do I think that it
makes any difference whether the female slave was the special object of the
trust, or whether she was merely a part of the estate left in trust.
15. The Same, Opinions, Book XVI.
Paulus holds that it is not necessary to pay interest on any profits acquired
after issue has been joined, and which the judge, in the discharge of his duty,
directs to be turned over, nor on those which have been collected before that
time, and which are stated to have been fraudulently obtained by the possessor.
16. The Same, Decrees, Book I.
Interest is not exacted on money given to the Government by way
of liberality.
(1) When interest on the price of a tract of land was demanded of a party who
had purchased it from the Treasury, and the purchaser denied that possession
had been delivered to him; the Emperor ruled that it was unjust for interest to
be exacted of one who had not gathered the crops.
17. The Same, On Interest.
Where a man bound himself to pay interest at the rate of five per cent per
annum, and if he failed to do so for any one year, he would then pay six per
cent on the entire sum of money from the day on which he borrowed it, and after
paying the interest for some years the stipulation finally became operative;
the Divine Marcus stated in a Rescript addressed to Fortunatus: "Go to the
Governor of the province who will reduce to the measure of its just
requirements the stipulation whose injustice you complain of."
This Constitution far exceeds the proper limit. What course should then be
pursued? The matter must be adjusted so that, in the future, the interest will
only increase from the day of default.
(1) The Divine Pius stated in a Rescript: "You are claiming accrued interest
due with very little justice, as the interval of a long time indicates that you
have neglected to collect it, for the reason that you intended, by not
demanding it from your debtor, to render yourself
more agreeable to him."
(2) In the case of an implied trust, the Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that
the heir should be deprived of all profits, and that they should be turned over
to the debtor; and therefore that the heir should be deprived of the benefit of
the interest.
(3) Where a trust cannot be executed for the benefit of a ward because he has
no guardian, the Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that the heir is not
considered to be in default. Therefore, nothing is due to him
who has been absent on public business, or has been prevented by any other just
cause from bringing an action for restitution. For how can a party be to blame
who cannot pay, even if he wishes to do so?
The same principle does not apply in this case as in that where relief is given
to minors who have failed to obtain an advantage, for interest is not imposed
on account of the gain to the plaintiff, but because of the delay of those who
should make payment.
(4) Where a party makes a contract with reference to a lease, unless it is
agreed that interest shall be due on rent which is not promptly paid, the
lessee will not be obliged to pay interest except in case of default.
(5) The Treasury does not pay interest on account of any contract entered into
by it, but collects it; as is customary in the case of the keepers of public
privies who are slow in paying their rent; and also in the case of those from
whom taxes are due. But where the Treasury takes the place of a private
individual, it is the custom for it also to pay interest.
06) Where debtors pay interest under six per cent, and they then become debtors
to the Treasury, after their obligations have been transferred to the Treasury,
they will be compelled to pay six per cent.
(7) It is very well known that those who are sued on account of their
mismanagement of public funds are liable to the payment of interest. The same
rule is observed where persons have charge of public works, if money remains in
their hands; but with reference to what they have paid to contractors, even
though they paid it negligently, the interest will be remitted to them. This is
the case, however, where no fraud exists, otherwise interest will also be due.
(8) Where no definite time has been specified by persons who have bequeathed
statues or paintings to be erected or hung in some public place, the time shall
be fixed by the Governor; and if the heirs do not comply, they must pay to the
Government interest at the rate of one-third of one per cent a month.
18. The Same, Opinions, Book III.
If it was agreed in the beginning that, in case of the eviction of certain
lands, the vendor shall refund the price, interest must also be paid after
eviction, even though the purchaser may have paid to his adversary all the
profits collected after the action for the ownership of the property was begun;
as any inconvenience sustained during the intermediate time must be borne by
the purchaser.
(1) Where the vendor dies after possession has been delivered, and it is
uncertain who his successor will be, the interest on the price must be paid if
it was not placed on deposit.
19. Gaius, On the Law of the Twelve Tables, Book VI.
Let us see whether judgment will also be rendered against the possessor in
every case where suit is brought for the profits. For what if he should bring
an action for silver, clothing, or anything else of this kind, or for the
usufruct, or for the mere ownership of the property
where the usufruct belongs to another? For no profit, to which this term can
rightly be applied, can be understood to be derived from the mere ownership;
nor, on the other hand can the usufruct properly be considered as profit. But
what if an action is brought to recover the mere property? The profits will be
included in the claim from the day that the usufructuary lost his usufruct.
Moreover, if suit is brought for the usufruct, Proculus says that the defendant
will have judgment rendered against him for all the profits which have been
collected. Again, Gallus AElius holds that if suit is brought for clothing, or a
cup, whatever could be collected by way of rent, if the articles were leased,
should be classed as profit.
(1) Where suit is brought to recover a right of way, it will be difficult for
any profits resulting therefrom to be estimated, unless some advantage which
the plaintiff could have enjoyed from the servitude should be classed as
profits, if he was not prevented from doing so at the time that he brought the
action; and this should be admitted as correct.
20. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book XII.
It is settled that, where illegal interest is united with the principal, the
said interest will not be due, but this does not affect the principal.
21. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIV.
It must be remembered that not everything which is done for a good reason in
order to postpone payment should be considered as default. For what if the
debtor desires his friends to be present, or his sureties to be summoned at the
time that the debt is paid, or intends to offer some exception? It is not held
that he is guilty of default;
22. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXVII.
Provided this is not done deceitfully for the purpose of committing fraud.
23. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIV.
Where a debtor is suddenly compelled to be absent on public business, and
cannot entrust his defence to anyone, he is not held to be in default; and this
is the case where he is in the power of the enemy.
. (1) Sometimes it is customary for a party to be considered to be in default
where there is no one against whom suit can be brought.
24. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXVII.
Where anyone delays in making payment, but is ready to join issue in the suit,
he is not held to be in default, at least if he has just cause for applying to
the court.
(1) Where the principal debtor is in default, the surety is also
liable.
(2) A debtor is in default to his creditor where he does not make payment
either to the creditor himself or to someone whom he has
directed to receive the money, or to him who is in the habit of transacting his
business. In this instance it is not held that he acquires, anything through a
free person, because these parties are only discharging their duties; just as
where anyone arrests a thief in the act of stealing from me, he is transacting
my business, and acquires for me a right of action for manifest theft. Again,
where an agent makes a demand for a slave upon a promisor, he renders the
stipulation perpetual.
25. Julianus, Digest, Book VII.
A party who is aware that a tract of land is jointly owned by himself and
another, and who gathers the crops from the same without the knowledge or
consent of his fellow-owner, does not acquire a right to any greater portion of
them than his interest in the land entitles him to.
Nor does it make any difference whether he or his fellow-owner, or both of
them, sow the seed, for the ownership of every kind of crop is acquired, not
through the right to the seed, but through that to the soil; and just as where
a party who knowingly has possession of a tract of land belonging to another,
cannot acquire the ownership of any part of the crop, no matter in what way the
land has been sown; so also, he who has possession of land belonging to himself
and another, will acquire no right to the crop on that portion of the land
which belongs to his fellow-owner.
(1) I sowed wheat on land belonging to another which Titius had bought in good
faith; will Titius, the bona fide purchaser, have a right to the crop after it
has been harvested? I answered that the profits obtained from a tract of land
should be understood to closely resemble those which slaves acquire by their
labor; for in gathering crops more consideration is paid to what produces them
than to the seed from which they are derived, and therefore no one can ever
doubt that if I should sow your wheat on my own ground, the crop and whatever
may be collected from the harvest will belong to me.
Again, a possessor in good faith has the same right to harvest the crop which
is granted to the actual owner of the land. Besides, since crops of every kind,
no matter by whom they have been sowed, belong to the usufructuary, much more
does this apply to bona fide possessors who have a still better right to the
crops, since they do not belong to the usufructuary until they have been
gathered by him, but they belong to the bona fide possessor, without reference
to how they may have been separated from the soil; just as in the case of a
party who holds land on the condition of paying a tax, the crops become his as
soon as they are separated from the soil.
(2) A bona fide purchaser sowed land of which he was in possession, and, before
he harvested the crop, ascertained that the land belonged to someone else. The
question arises, will he be entitled to the crop after it is harvested? I
answered that a bona fide purchaser should be understood to have a right to
harvest the crop, provided the land has not been evicted, for whatever a slave
belonging to another,
and whom I purchased in good faith, acquires for me by means of my property or
by his own labor, is mine, so long as he is not evicted.
26. The Same, On Minicius, Book VI.
Julianus denies that game constitutes the profit of land, unless the profit of
the land consists of game.
27. Africanus, Questions, Book VIII.
Where a debtor is in default to the head of a household, no inquiry is made as
to whether he is in default to his heir; because the right passes to the next
heir by inheritance, and is therefore also transmitted to all others in
succession.
28. Gaius, Daily Occurrences, Book II.
The yield of flocks, such as milk, hair, and wool, is also considered profit.
Therefore lambs, kids, and calves, at birth, immediately become the absolute
property of a bona fide possessor, or an usufructuary.
(1) The offspring of a female slave is not, however, considered to be profit,
and therefore belongs to the owner of the property. For it would seem absurd
for a man to be classed under the term "profit," when Nature has prepared the
fruits of everything for the benefit of the human race.
29. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIV.
It is settled that where anyone has stipulated for interest above the legal
rate, or for compound interest, what is unlawfully added is not held to be
added at all, and legal interest can be collected.
30. Paulus, Rules.
The interest on money lent by municipalities will be due to them, even under a
contract without consideration.
31. Ulpianus, Opinions, Book I.
Where the following has been added to a stipulation, "and interest, if any is
due," it will be void if the rate of interest is not mentioned.
32. Marcianus, Rules, Book IV.
Default is understood to apply, not to the property, but to the person; that is
to say, where the party, after having been notified at the proper place, does
not make payment; and this should be investigated by the court, for, as
Pomponius says in the Twelfth Book of Epistles, the definition of this term is
difficult.
The Divine Pius stated in a Rescript addressed to Tullius Balbus, that the
meaning of the word "default" cannot be determined by reference to any
Constitution, nor by inquiry of legal authorities, since it is rather a
question of fact than of law.
(1) Proof of default is not sufficient where notice is served upon a slave of
the absent debtor by the creditor, or the agent of the latter; since it is held
that the master himself must be notified. But, if subse-
quently, when the creditor has the power to do so, he should neglect to
prosecute the action instituted for the recovery of the debt, the debtor will
not be understood to be in default from that time forward.
(2) In bona fide contracts, interest becomes due through default.
(3) But what if a son under paternal control and his father, to whom the
liability of the former has passed, owe a debt which has been contracted by
order of the father; or if the money has been expended for his benefit; or if
it has become a part of the peculium of the son; which one of the parties must
be considered to be in default? If only the father is sued on account of being
in default, he cannot be held liable; still, an action will be granted against
the son for the benefit of the creditor, to compel him to pay what the creditor
has failed to collect from the father. Where, however, the son is in default,
the creditor then can sue him for the entire sum, or he can sue his father only
for the amount of the peculium.
(4) But where two debtors have bound themselves jointly, the default of one
does not prejudice the rights of the other.
(5) Moreover, if a surety alone is in default, he will not be liable; just as
if he had killed his slave Stichus, whom he had promised to deliver, but a
praetorian action will be granted against him.
33. Ulpianus, On the Duties of the Curator of the Government.
Where the money of the Government has been well placed, the debtor should not
be uneasy on account of the principal, and especially is this the case where
the money bears interest; or if it does not do so, the Governor of the province
should provide for the security of the Government, only he must not show
himself to be a harsh and insulting collector, but he must act with moderation,
and be kind and efficient, and humane and firm; for there is a great deal of
difference between disdainful insolence and diligence which is not prompted by
ambition.
(1) Again, he should take care that the public money is not lent without good
pledges or security.
34. The Same, On the Edict, Book XV.
Interest takes the place of produce, and therefore should not be separated from
it; hence in legacies and trusts, in actions on guardianship, and in all other
bona fide actions, this rule is observed. Wherefore we say that the same
principle applies to all other accessions.
35. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LVII.
Interest runs after issue has been joined in a case.
36. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXI.
The rents of urban estates are considered to be profits.
37. The Same, On the Edict, Book X.
Interest is included in the counter-action based on the ground of voluntary
agency, where I borrow money in order to pay your creditor,
because he was either to be placed in possession of your property, or about to
sell your pledges. But what if, having the money at home, I paid the debt for
one of the above-mentioned reasons? I think that it is true that interest
should be paid where I have freed you from such a great inconvenience, but only
such as is customary in that part of the country should be considered due; that
is, such as has been established in the case of bona fideactions.
But if I should pay money after borrowing it, the interest which I myself have
paid can be collected; provided that, by doing so, I have been of greater
benefit to you than the value of this interest.
38. Paulus, On Plautius, Book VI.
Let us consider, in a general way, where the produce of property is included in
a personal action.
(1) And, in fact, where a tract of land is transferred for some consideration
or other, as, for instance, by way of dowry, or that a marriage may be
renounced, the crops should also be given up, that is to say those which have
been gathered during the time that the marriage contract lasted; but, so far as
those which have been gathered afterwards are concerned, if there was any
default with reference to the property on the part of him whose duty it was to
surrender it, they should by all means be included. Even if it was the woman's
fault that the marriage was not solemnized, the better opinion is that the
crops should be given up. The reason for this is that if the woman's betrothed
was not compelled to surrender the crops, he would have been able to neglect
the land.
(2) Moreover, if I have paid money which was not due for land, and I bring suit
to recover it, I ought also to recover the crops.
(3) The same rule applies where land is given mortis causa, and the party who
gave it regains his health, and therefore a right to a personal action for its
recovery arises.
(4) In both the Fabian and Paulian Actions, by means of which property which
has been disposed of for the purpose of defrauding creditors, is recovered, the
produce of said property must also be returned; for the Praetor uses his
authority to place everything in the same condition as if nothing had been
alienated; and this is not unjust, for the words, "you shall return," which the
Praetor makes use of in this matter, have a broad signification, so that the
produce of the property must also be surrendered.
(5) And, therefore, when the Praetor agrees to the restitution, the produce must
also be given up; as in proceedings under the interdict based upon the
commission of violence.
(6) Moreover, if, induced by force or fear, I give up property, it is not held
to be restored to me unless the produce of the same is also restored; nor can
my default deprive me of any of my rights.
(7) If I am entitled to an action to recover something which is not mine, as,
for example, on a stipulation; I cannot recover the produce, even if the other
party is in default. But if issue has been joined, then
Sabinus and Cassius hold that, according to the principles of equity, any
profits which may have afterwards accrued must be delivered up, in order that
the case may be placed in its original condition. I think that this opinion is
very correctly stated.
(8) The profits of property must also be restored in the case of a purchaser.
(9) In a partnership, however, the profits must be divided among the partners.
(10) Where I revoke the natural possession of property it remains mine; but let
us see whether this applies to the profits. And, in fact, in cases of deposit
and loan for use, the profits must be given up, as we have already stated.
(11) Again, in proceedings under an interdict based on force and clandestine
action, the better opinion is that all accessions and profits should be
returned.
(12) Crops gathered from land before marriage become part of the dowry, and
should be returned along with it.
(13) The same principle applies to the profit of urban estates.
(14) Moreover, if I wish to divide a tract of land with you and you refuse, and
I cultivate the land, should the crops from it be divided after the expenses
have been deducted? I think that they should be divided.
(15) The profits should always be delivered in other bona fideactions.
(16) Where a dowry is left by a husband to his wife, the profits of the same
obtained before marriage are included in the legacy.
39. Modestinus, Differences, Book IX.
Where mares have been left in trust, their foals are also due after the heir is
in default. Where a number of horses have been left, even though there be no
default, their offspring belongs to the increase of the drove.
40. The Same, Rules, Book IV.
The calculation of interest is legally made up to the day when the creditor
sells his pledges.
41. The Same, Opinions, Book III.
Judgment having been rendered against a guardian, he delayed the execution of
the judgment by taking an appeal. Herennius Modestinus gave it as his opinion
that the judge who had jurisdiction of the appeal could also hold him
responsible for interest during the intermediate time, if he ascertained that
the appeal was fraudulently interposed for the purpose of delay.
(1) Lucius Titius, who owed the sum of a hundred aurei and interest on the same
for a certain time, tendered and sealed up a smaller sum than he owed. I ask
whether Titius did not owe interest on the money which he sealed up. Modestinus
answered that if it was not agreed at the time of the loan that the debtor
should be permitted to
pay what he had borrowed by instalments, the payment of interest for the entire
debt would not be affected; if, when the creditor was ready to receive the
whole amount, the debtor who failed to make the payment of the entire sum only
deposited a part of it.
(2) Gaius Seius borrowed a certain sum of money from Aulus Agerius on the
following note: "The undersigned says that I have received, and I acknowledge
having received from him, borrowed money to the amount of ten aurei, which I
promise to pay to him on the Kalends of next July, together with the interest
on the same that is agreed upon between us." I ask whether interest can be
collected on this instrument, and if so, how much. Modestinus answered that if
it does not appear how much interest was agreed upon, it cannot be collected.
42. The Same, Opinions, Book XL
Herennius Modestinus gave it as his opinion that crops taken from land after
the ownership of the same had been acquired by means of a trust, belonging to
the beneficiary; even though the greater part of the year had elapsed before
the trust became operative.
43. The Same, Opinions, Book XVIII.
Herennius Modestinus held that a party who institutes proceedings in behalf of
the Treasury can collect interest which was not included in the stipulation,
after he has collected what is due to the Treasury for the time during which
the debtor was in default.
44. The Same, Pandects, Book X.
No one can stipulate for a penalty instead of interest above the lawful rate.
45. Pomponius, On Quintus Mucius, Book XXII.
A wife, or a husband, acquires the right to the produce of property which has
been given by one to the other, that is to say, what either has been acquired
by his or her labor, for example, by sowing; but if an apple should be plucked,
or a tree cut down, it does not become the property of the party responsible
for the act, just as it would not belong to any bona fidepossessor, because the
produce is not derived from his or her personal exertion.
46. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXII.
There is no doubt that whatever has been expended in gathering the crops should
be deducted from the crops themselves.
47. Scaevola, Digest, Book IX.
It is held that where a party is ready to join issue in a case, and his
adversary fails to file his complaint, he will not be held to be in default.
48. The Same, Digest, Book XXII.
A husband bequeathed to his wife the usufruct of the third part of his
property, and the ownership of the said third part if she should have children.
The heirs accused the wife of forging the will and of
other crimes, by which they were prevented from claiming the legacies. In the
meantime, a son was born to the woman, and the condition of the legacy was
thereby fulfilled.
The question arose, if it was established that the will was not forged, should
the crops be delivered to the owner? The answer was that they should be.
49. Javolenus, On the Last Works of Labeo, Book II.
The power of giving property in pledge is a product of the same.
TITLE II. CONCERNING MARITIME INTEREST.
1. Modestinus, Pandects, Book X.
Money is transported which is carried across the sea. If, however, it is
expended in the same place where it was lent, it cannot be designated as
transported. Let us see, however, whether merchandise purchased with this money
will be considered to occupy the same position. It makes a difference whether
the merchandise is carried at the risk of the creditor, for then the money will
be transported.
2. Pomponius, On Plautius, Book III.
Labeo says if there is no one who can be notified on the part of the promisor
with reference to money which is to be transported, an instrument should be
drawn up in the presence of witnesses, which will take the place of a
notification.
3. Modestinus, Rules, Book IV.
In the case of money transported by sea, it is at the risk of the creditor from
the day on which it is agreed that the ship will sail.
4. Papinianus, Opinions, Book III.
It makes no difference whether the money to be transported is not at the risk
of the creditor when it is received, or whether it ceases to be at his risk
after a certain time, or upon the fulfillment of a certain condition; and
therefore in either instance a higher rate of interest than is legal will not
be due. In the first instance, a higher rate can never be demanded; in the
second, when the risk has ceased to exist, neither pledges nor hypothecations
can be retained for the purpose of collecting a higher rate of interest.
(1) If slaves should be sent with the money transported, for the purpose of
collecting it when due, interest for every day mentioned in the stipulation
will be payable to the limit of twelve per cent; but more than twice the amount
cannot be collected. Where it was separately stated in the stipulation, with
reference to the interest, when the money would be no longer at the creditor's
risk, whatever lawful interest was lacking in one clause will be supplied by
the effect of the other.
5. Scaevola, Opinions, Book VI.
The price is for the risk incurred, and resembles the case where you are
entitled to receive what you paid and something besides, under a condition
(even though it be a penal one) which was not fulfilled, provided it does not
depend upon chance; for instance, one from which personal actions are
accustomed to arise, as, "If you manumit a slave, if you do not perform a
certain act, if I do not recover my health," etc. There will be no doubt that
if, in order to equip a fisherman, I give him a certain sum of money on
condition that he will repay me if he makes a good catch; or if I furnish money
to an athlete in order that he may exhibit himself and practice his profession;
on condition that, if he is successful, he will repay it.
(1) In all these instances, however, where an agreement is made without a
stipulation, it causes the obligation to increase.
6. Paulus, Questions, Book XXV.
A broker who lent money at maritime interest, received certain merchandise
which was in the ship by way of pledge, under the condition that if this was
not sufficient to discharge the entire debt, he could have recourse to other
merchandise loaded in different vessels, and which had already been pledged to
other brokers with the understanding that if anything remained after they were
satisfied, it would be considered pledged to the first broker.
The question arose, if the first ship which contained sufficient merchandise to
pay the entire debt should be lost, whether the loss should be borne by the
creditor if the ship was destroyed within the days appointed to make the
voyage; or whether he would still have a claim upon the merchandise which
remained in the other ships. I answered that in other cases the diminution of
the property pledged is at the risk of the debtor, and does not concern the
creditor, but when money to be transported is paid on such a condition that the
creditor will have no claim unless the vessel arrives safely at its destination
within the specified time, the obligation of the loan itself, where the
condition is not fulfilled, is held to be at an end; and therefore the right of
the creditor to even those pledges which were not lost will be extinguished. If
the ship should be lost within the specified time, and the condition of the
stipulation is held not to have taken place, no question can then be raised
with reference to the availability of the pledges which were in the other
vessels. But when can the creditor claim possession of the other pledges? He
will certainly be able to do so when the condition of the obligation is
fulfilled; or the pledges which he first received have been lost by some
accident, or sold at too low a price; or if the vessel should be lost after the
time has passed during which he was bound to assume the risk.
7. The Same, On the Edict, Book III.
There are certain contracts by which interest is due, just as in the case of a
stipulation. For if I give ten aurei to be transported by sea, on condition
that if the ship arrives safely I will be entitled to the
principal together with a certain amount of interest, it must be held that I
can receive the principal and interest.
8. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXVII.
Servius says that a penalty for money transported by sea cannot be demanded, if
the creditor was to blame for not receiving it within the specified time.
9. Labeo, Epitomes of Probabilities by Paulus, Book V.
If a penalty for failure to pay money transported by sea is promised, as is
customary, even though on the first day when it is payable no one should be
living who owed the said money, still, the penalty can be exacted, just as if
there was an heir to the debtor.
TITLE III. CONCERNING PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS.
1. Papinianus, Questions, Book III.
Whenever a question is raised with reference to the family or race of any
person, he must prove whether he belongs to it or not.
2. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LXIX.
Proof is incumbent upon the party who affirms a fact, not upon him who denies
it.1
3. Papinianus, Opinions, Book IX.
Where an implied trust is charged upon a party who is appointed heir for an
equal or a larger share of the estate, by both a first and a second will, the
proof of changed intention on the part of the testator devolves upon him
against whom suit is brought; for often a motive of secrecy induces owners of
property to appoint persons heirs in whose good faith they have confidence.
4. Paulus, Opinions, Book VI.
The purchaser must prove that the slave in question had taken to flight before
he purchased him.
5. The Same, Opinions, Book IX.
Where anyone alleges that his adversary is deprived of some right by a
particular law or constitution, he must prove it.
(1) Paulus also holds that where anyone denies that emancipation has been
legally accomplished, he must furnish proof of his statement.
1 This rule, founded upon natural reason, has been adopted by all modern
systems of jurisprudence. In the Roman practice, the application of the onus
probandi was subject to continual variation, being dependent upon the different
questions raised by the pleadings of the parties during the trial; and if the
legal presumption was in favor of one of them, his opponent was required to
show that it was not well founded. --- ED.
6. Scaevola, Opinions, Book II.
A patron must clearly show that his freedman has given something for the
purpose of cheating him, in order to be able to revoke a portion of what has
been fraudulently bestowed.
7. Paulus, Sentences, Book II.
Where evidence of former flight is lacking, a slave shall be believed, if put
to the torture, for he is held to be interrogated in his own behalf, and not
for or against his master.
8. The Same, On Plautius, Book XVIII.
If a son under the control of his father denies the fact, the Praetor must
direct the son to first prove his allegation, and this rule has been
established on account of the affection which he ought to manifest for his
father, and because the son practically alleges that he is free. Hence anyone
who asserts his right to freedom is in the first place, ordered to prove it.
9. Celsus, Digest, Book I.
Where an agreement is made in which there is no mention of an heir, the
question arises whether this has been done in order that only the person of the
party himself may be considered. But although it may be true that he who makes
use of an exception must establish good ground for doing so; still, the
plaintiff, and not he who pleaded the exception, must prove that the agreement
merely had reference to himself, and did not include his heir, because in such
cases, we generally provide for our heirs as well as for ourselves.
10. Marcellus, Digest, Book III.
The Senate decreed that the registers of the Censor and the public records are
better evidence than that of witnesses.
11. Celsus, Digest, Book XI.
A ward is not compelled to prove that the sureties furnished by his guardian
were not solvent when they were accepted, for proof of this must be required of
those whose duty it was to watch over the ward, and provide security for him.
12. The Same, Digest, Book XVII.
Fifty aurei were bequeathed to you by will, and the same legacy was included in
codicils which were subsequently executed. It is important to ascertain whether
the testator intended to double the legacy, or merely to repeatedly mention it,
or did so, having forgotten that he had already made the bequest in his will.
From which party then must proof of the intention of the testator be exacted?
At first sight, it would appear more just that the plaintiff should prove what
he claims, but there is no doubt that proof is sometimes required of the
defendant; for if I bring suit for a claim and the defendant answers that the
money
has been paid, he himself is required to establish this. Therefore, in the
present instance, if the plaintiff exhibits two instruments, and the heir
alleges that the last one is void, the latter must prove this in court.
13. The Same, Digest, Book XXX.
Where an inquiry was made with reference to the age of a man, our Emperor
issued the following Rescript: "It is both hard and unjust, when a question
arises with reference to a party's age, and different statements are made, that
one should be accepted which is prejudicial; but in the trial of a case the
truth should be considered, and his age should be computed according to the
document which seems to be most credible, and to deserve the greatest
confidence in the investigation of the matter."
14. Ulpianus, On the Office of the Consul, Book II.
Inquiries should be made with reference to a person who, having passed as a
freedman, now alleges that he is freeborn and desires to proceed as plaintiff.
If, indeed, he occupies the position of a freedman, there is no doubt that he
must bring an action to have himself declared freeborn, and establish that this
is the case. But if he enjoys the reputation of having been born free, and he
is alleged to be a freedman (of course by him who is responsible for the
controversy), he who says that he is his freedman must prove it. For what
difference does it make whether anyone asserts that he is his slave or his
freedman? Where, however, a party has sufficient confidence in his claim of
freedom of birth as voluntarily to undertake to produce proofs of it for the
purpose of obtaining a decision declaring him freeborn (that is to say that he
was born free as he alleges), it may be asked whether he should be permitted to
do so. I am of the opinion that this should be done, and that he should have an
opportunity to prove that he is freeborn, and have a decision rendered in his
favor, as no one can be taken at a disadvantage by such a judgment.
15. Modestinus, Opinions, Book XII.
A certain man, asserting that he was the son of Seia and Gaius, seized the
estate of Gaius, although the latter had brothers, and discharged certain
trusts in favor of these brothers, as if by the direction of the deceased, and
took a receipt. They, having afterwards ascertained that the alleged son was
not their brother, asked whether they could bring an action against him to
recover the estate, on account of the receipt which they had given him as the
son of the deceased. Modestinus answered that the position of the party to whom
the receipt had been given in discharge of the trust, and who could be proved
by the brothers of the deceased not to be his son, was not in the slightest
degree established by this fact, but that proof must be submitted by the
brothers.
16. Terentius Clemens, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book III.
The statement of a mother as to the birth of her children, as well as that of a
grandfather, must be accepted.
17. Celsus, Digest, Book VI.
When a question is raised with reference to the Lex Falcidia, the heir must
prove that this law is applicable, because if he cannot do so, judgment will
properly be rendered against him.
18. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book VI.
Whenever services are demanded of a freedman, proof of his right to do so is
required from the party who alleges that he is his patron; therefore Julianus
holds that, although in a matter which is in controversy the patron is held to
be entitled to possession, he who is said to be the freedman should not take
the part of plaintiff, but he who asserts that he is the patron should do so.
(1) Where anyone alleges that some fraudulent act has been committed, he must
prove the fraud, even though he may have made this statement in an exception.
(2) The plaintiff should be compelled to prove the truth of an interrogatory
which is made, that is, where it is alleged that a party who was interrogated
in court answered that he was the sole heir; or if, having been interrogated,
he is said to have remained silent, the same rule must be held to apply; and
the blame must be placed not upon him who stated in his exception that he did
not answer, but upon the plaintiff.
19. The Same, Disputations, Book VII.
It must be said, with reference to exceptions, that the defendant is required
to perform the part of plaintiff, and he himself prove his exception, just as
the plaintiff must prove his claim; for instance, where he pleads an exception
on the ground of a contract entered into, he must show that the contract was
actually made.
(1) Where anyone who promised to appear in court alleges as a reason for not
doing so that he has been absent on public business, or that some malicious act
of his adversary prevented him from appearing, or his health, or a storm
hindered him, he must prove it.
(2) Where a party makes use of an exception on the ground that the appointment
of the attorney of his adversary is not valid, because his adversary could not
appoint, or be appointed an attorney, he must prove the truth of the exception
which he has interposed.
(3) The same rule will apply where suit is brought for a sum of money which is
alleged to have been paid.
(4) Again, where an exception is pleaded on the ground of a decision rendered;
or because an oath is said to have been tendered with reference to the property
for which suit now is brought, or because the matter in controversy has
reference to a game of chance, the party who filed the exception must prove all
these allegations.
20. Julianus, Digest, Book XLIII.
Where anyone seizes a freeman by force, and keeps him in chains, he is most
unworthy of the advantages enjoyed by a possessor, because
it cannot be proved that, at the time that proceedings were first instituted,
the man was free.
21. Marcianus, Institutes, Book VI.
I think that the better opinion is that he who brings the action, that is to
say the legatee, must prove that the testator knew that the property bequeathed
belonged, or was encumbered to another, and that the heir is not required to
prove that it belonged to someone else, or was encumbered, because the
necessity of proving his allegations always rests upon the plaintiff.
22. Ulpianus, Opinions, Book I.
He who says that he has changed his mind must prove it.
23. Marcianus, On the Hypothecary Formula.
It must be proved, before everything else, that it was agreed between the
plaintiff and the debtor, that the property should be pledged or hypothecated.
After the plaintiff has proved this, he must also establish the fact that the
property belonged to the debtor at the time the pledge was agreed upon, or that
the hypothecation was made with his consent.
24. Modestinus, Rules, Book IV.
Where a promissory note has been cancelled, although the presumption is that
the debtor has been released, still, he can lawfully be sued for the amount
which the creditor can show by manifest evidence is still due to him.
25. Paulus, Questions, Book III.
Where a question arises with reference to money which is not due, who must
prove this? The matter should be adjusted so that if he who is said to have
received the property denies that the money is not owing, and he who paid it
proves its payment by competent evidence, then he who denies absolutely that he
received the money, if he wishes to be heard, must be compelled to furnish
proof that the money was lawfully due to him; for it would be absurd if he who,
in the beginning, denied that he had received the money, and afterwards was
shown to have received it, should require proof from his adversary that it was
not owing to him.
If, however, in the first place, the plaintiff should acknowledge that he had
received the money, but should assert that it was due to him, the presumption
undoubtedly will lie in favor of the party who received it, for he who pays is
never so negligent as to throw away his money without hesitation, and pay it
when it is not due; and especially is this the case where the party who alleges
that he paid what was not due is the diligent and careful head of a household,
for it is incredible that a person of this kind should be so easily deceived.
Therefore he who alleges that he has paid money which was not due will be
required to produce evidence that the said money was paid
through the fraud of the party who received it, or on account of some just
cause of ignorance, and unless he shows this he will have no right
to recover it.
(1) Where, however, he who complains of the payment of money which was not due
is a ward, a minor, or a woman, or, indeed, a man of full age but a soldier, or
a cultivator of the soil and inexperienced in public business, or fond of a
simple life and given to idleness; then he who receives the money must show
that he actually did so, and that it was due and payable to him, and if he
fails to do this he must
refund it.
(2) This only applies where the party who paid the money contends that the
entire sum was not due. Where, however, he complains of the payment of only a
portion, on the ground that only a part of the money paid was not due; or that
it was due in the beginning, but the debt was afterwards discharged, and he
ignorantly paid it a second time; or that, being protected by an exception, he
paid the money through mistake; he, himself, must, by all means, establish that
he either paid more than was due, or that he paid money a second time through
mistake, or that, being protected by an exception, he ignorantly paid the
money; in accordance with the general rule which requires those to furnish
proof who state that they have exceptions to offer, or who allege that
they have paid the debt.
(3) In all the instances which we have suggested, permission should be granted
to him upon whom rests the burden of proof to tender the oath to his adversary,
with reference to the truth of the matter, before tendering him the oath pro
calumnia; so that the judge may regulate his decision according to the
confidence which he has in the oath of the plaintiff, the right to the
defendant to tender the oath back to his adversary being reserved.
(4) This point relates to the payment of money which is not due. Where,
however, a written promise to pay is said to have been made for money which is
not due, and the terms of the instrument are indefinite, then the party in
whose favor the note was executed will be compelled to prove that the sum
mentioned in it is due to him, unless he who made the note has explicitly
stated his reasons for doing so; for then he must abide by his admission,
unless he is ready to show by conclusive documentary evidence that he made the
promise to pay money which he did not owe.
26. Papinianus, Questions, Book XX.
Procula, to whom a large sum of money was due from her brother under the terms
of a trust, wished to set off this sum proportionately against his heirs after
his death; and in opposition to this it was alleged that she had never demanded
the money of her brother during his lifetime, but that she herself had paid him
certain sums of money for various reasons growing out of accounts which they
had with one another. The Divine Commodus, in deciding the case, did not admit
the set-off, but held that she had tacitly released her brother from the
execution of the trust.
27. Scaevola, Digest, Book XXXIII.
A man made a will, and bequeathed a lawful share of his estate to one who was
only entitled to receive a certain amount, and he then provided as follows: "I
give and bequeath one hundred aurei to Titius, which he has placed in my hands,
but of which I have not given him any written evidence, because I have held all
the fortune and property which he received from his mother in my possession
without any note. Moreover, I desire that there should be delivered and paid to
Titius a hundred and fifty aurei out of my estate, which I have received as the
rent of land, being the proceeds of crops harvested and sold, as well as any
sums shown on my books to have been received by Titius from his mother, and
which I have appropriated to my own use."
I ask whether Titius can collect this money. The answer was that if Titius can
prove that the property had come into the hands of the testator in accordance
with the above-mentioned statement, he can do so; for it is held that in a case
where a party is not entitled to receive more than a certain amount by a
legacy, such provisions are added to a will in violation of law.
28. Labeo, Epitomes of Probabilities, by Paulus, Book VII.
Where it is the duty of an arbiter to decide a case, should he inquire whether
a memorandum of the labor performed exists, or whether anyone remembers that
the labor has been performed? Paulus says that when inquiry is made in a case
of arbitration, as to whether a memorandum of the labor performed is in
existence or not, it ought not to be asked whether anyone remembers the time,
or under what consul the work was done, but whether it can be proved in any way
whatsoever when it was done. And this should be accomplished, as the Greeks are
accustomed to state, in a general way, for it cannot be retained in the memory
that the work has been done; for example, within a certain year, since, in the
meantime, no one will probably remember under what consuls it was performed.
But where the opinion of all persons is that they did not hear of the work
being done, or see it, or learn of it from any who might have seen it, or heard
of it, and, no matter how far back one may go, no memorandum of the work
performed can be found; this will be sufficient.
29. Scaevola, Digest, Book IX.
The Emperors Antoninus and Verus stated in a Rescript to Claudius Apollinaris
the following, namely: "It is decreed that proofs given with reference to
children shall not consist of the mere statements of witnesses, but also of
letters which are alleged to have been sent to wives, if their authenticity is
established, and they can be introduced as documentary evidence."
(1) A wife, who had been repudiated while pregnant, brought forth a son during
the absence of her husband; and, in the course of the proceedings instituted in
consequence, confessed that the child was illegitimate. The inquiry arose
whether the son was under the control of his
father, and if when his mother died intestate, he could enter upon her estate
by order of his father, or whether the confession made by his angry mother
would prejudice his rights. The answer was that, in cases of this kind an
opportunity always existed for ascertaining the truth.
30. Labeo, Opinions, Book I.
Labeo's opinion given to Festus was that a female slave could not offer, as
proof of the freedom which she claimed, either a trust left to her by will, or
the fact that provision for her maintenance had been bequeathed to her as the
nurse of the testator.
31. The Same, to Mactorius Sabinus, Book II.
The mention of money in a note, which is alleged to be due for some other
reason, does not possess the force of an obligation.
TITLE IV.
CONCERNING THE AUTHENTICITY OF INSTRUMENTS AND THEIR Loss.
1. Paulus, Sentences, Book IV.
All those things by means of which legal proceedings can be instituted should
be classed under the head of instruments, and therefore evidence, as well as
persons, are placed in that category.
2. The Same, Opinions, Book V.
Where anyone is sued by the Treasury, this must be done, not by means of an
extract or the copy of any written document, but on the original itself, so
that the truth of the contract may be established. It is not proper that a
forged document should have any force or effect in court.
3. The Same, Opinions, Book III.
Paulus stated that: "An obligation should not be antedated, but the parties who
have agreed to this are not considered to be guilty of forgery, since the act
was performed in the presence and with the consent of the parties, and the
debtor is guilty of a greater offence than the creditor."
4. Gaius, On the Hypothecary Formula.
Where property is hypothecated, it does not matter in what terms this may be
effected, as in the case in those obligations which are contracted by consent.
Therefore, if it is agreed that property shall be hypothecated without this
being done in writing, and this can be proved, the property with reference to
which the agreement was made will be encumbered; for written instruments are
drawn up in these matters in order that what has been agreed upon may be more
easily
established. The transaction will be valid, however, without them, if the
evidence is forthcoming; just as marriage is valid where testimony exists
without any written instruments having been executed.
5. Callistratus, Questions, Book II.
Where a transaction shows that it has actually been concluded without any
documentary evidence, it will be none the less valid because no written
instrument with reference to it exists.
6. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book L.
Where a question arises with reference to the deposit of a will, and there is
some doubt with whom this should be done, we prefer that it should always be
left with an old, rather than with a young person, with one of high rather than
with one of inferior rank, with a man rather than with a woman, and with a
freeborn person rather than with a freedman.
TITLE V. CONCERNING WITNESSES.
1. Arcadius, also called Charisius, On Witnesses.
The employment of witnesses is frequent and necessary, and the testimony of
those whose integrity is established should especially be taken.
(1) Witnesses can also be produced not only in criminal cases, but also in
actions involving money, in accordance with the circumstances, and those can
give evidence who are not forbidden to do so, or are excused from testifying by
any law.
(2) Although a considerable number of witnesses is prescribed by certain laws,
still, according to the Constitutions of the Emperors, this requirement is
confined to a sufficient number of the same, in order that the judges may
regulate it, and permit only that number of witnesses to be called which they
deem necessary, lest a superfluous multitude may, through unrestricted power,
be summoned for the purpose of annoying the parties to the suit.
2. Modestinus, Rules, Book VIII.
The rank, the integrity, the manners, and the gravity of witnesses must be
taken into consideration, and therefore those who make contradictory
statements, or who hesitate while giving their evidence, should not be heard.
3. Callistratus, Concerning Judicial Inquiries, Book IV.
The integrity of witnesses should be carefully investigated, and in
consideration of their personal characteristics, attention should be, in the
first place, paid to their rank; as to whether the witness is a Decurion or a
plebeian; whether his life is honorable and without blame, or whether he has
been branded with infamy and is liable to censure;
whether he is rich or poor, lest he may readily swear falsely for the purpose
of gain; whether he is an enemy to him against whom he testifies, or whether he
is a friend to him in whose favor he gives his evidence. For if the witness is
free from suspicion, either because his personal character is beyond reproach,
for the reason that he is neither influenced by the expectation of gain, nor by
any inducements of favor or enmity, he will be competent. Therefore, the Divine
Hadrian stated in a Rescript addressed to Vivius Verus, the Governor of
Cilicia, that he who hears a case has the best means of judging how much
confidence should be reposed in witnesses. The following are the terms of the
Rescript : "You are best qualified to ascertain how much faith should be placed
in witnesses, who they are, what is their rank and reputation, whether they
seem to speak sincerely, whether or not they have agreed upon and planned the
same statements together, and whether they, without hesitation, return suitable
answers to the questions put to
them."
(1) Another Rescript of the same Emperor, addressed to Valerius Verus, on the
subject of ascertaining the confidence to be placed in witnesses, is extant,
and is in the following words: "It cannot be laid down with precision what
evidence will be sufficient for the proof of any matter, just as it is not
always essential to establish the existence of any fact by means of public
documents, although this is frequently done. Otherwise, the number of
witnesses, as well as their rank and authority, and their general reputation,
would tend to confirm the proof of the subject under investigation.
"I can only say to you in general terms, that a judicial inquiry should not be
confined merely to one kind of evidence, but that it is necessary for you to
form your opinion as to what you believe to have been proved, or what you may
think has not been satisfactorily established, through the exercise of your own
judgment."
(2) The Divine Hadrian also stated in a Rescript to Julius Rufinus, Proconsul
of Macedonia, that he must pay more attention to the witnesses than to their
evidence. The words of the Rescript on this point are as follows: "Alexander
accused Aper of certain crimes before me, but he did not prove them, or produce
any witnesses; but he desired to use evidence which I am unwilling to admit,
for I am accustomed to examine witnesses, and I have sent him back to the
Governor of the province that he may make inquiry with reference to the
credibility of the witnesses, and unless he proves what he alleges, he shall be
sent into exile."
(3) The same Emperor stated the following in a Rescript to Cabin-ius Maximus:
"The weight to be attached to the oral evidence of witnesses who are present is
one thing, and that of written testimony which is to be read is another.
Therefore deliberate carefully whether you desire to retain them, and if you
do, allow them their costs."
(4) It is proved by the Lex Julia relating to violence, that those shall not be
permitted to give testimony against a defendant who has been freed by him or by
his father; or who have not yet arrived at
puberty; or anyone who has been condemned for a public crime, and has not been
restored to his former condition, or who is in chains, or in prison, or has
hired himself out to fight with wild beasts; or any woman who openly
prostitutes herself, or has already done so; or anyone who has been sentenced
or convicted of having received money for giving or withholding testimony. For,
indeed, certain persons should not be allowed to testify on account of the
reverence due to their position; others on account of the unreliability of
their judgment; and still others because of the notorious infamy of their
lives.
(5) Witnesses should not hastily be summoned from a long distance, and still
less should soldiers be called away from their standards or their stations for
the purpose of giving evidence; and this the Divine Hadrian stated in a
Rescript.
The Divine Brothers also stated in a Rescript that: "With reference to the
summoning of witnesses, the judge should carefully ascertain what is the custom
in the province over which he presides; for if it should be proved that
witnesses are frequently summoned to another city for the purpose of
testifying, there is no doubt that those can be summoned whom the judge may
decide are necessary to be called in the case."
4. Paulus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book II.
It is provided by the Lex Julia having reference to public prosecutions, that a
man, if unwilling, cannot be compelled to give testimony in court against his
father-in-law, his son-in-law, his step-father, his stepson, his cousin,
whether male or female, his cousin's child, or any of those who are related in
a nearer degree. Nor can the freedman of anyone, or of his children, his
parents, his or her wife or husband, be permitted to testify against him, if he
is accused.
The same rule applies to a patron, and a patroness, for neither of them can be
compelled to give testimony against their freedman, nor a freedman against his
patron.
5. Gaius, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book IV.
In the laws where the exception is made that neither a son-in-law nor a father-
in-law, if unwilling, can be compelled to give testimony; it is held that the
betrothed of the daughter is included in the term "son-in-law," and also that
the father of the betrothed woman is included in the term "father-in-law."
6. Licinius Rufinus, Rules, Book II.
Those witnesses are not considered to be competent who can be commanded to
testify.
7. Modestinus, Rules, Book III.
The evidence of a slave must be believed when there is no other way of
ascertaining the truth.
8. Scaevola, Rules, Book IV.
Old men, invalids, soldiers, magistrates who are absent on business for the
State, and such persons as are forbidden to appear, cannot be compelled to
testify, if unwilling to do so.
9. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book I.
A father is not a competent witness for his son, nor a son for his father.
10. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book I.
No one is held to be a competent witness in his own case.
11. The Same, Decrees, Book XXXIII.
A party who has not been summoned as a witness is allowed to testify for the
purpose of proving a transaction.
12. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXVII.
Where the number of witnesses is not specified by law, two are sufficient, for
the term "several" is embraced in the number two.
13. Papinianus, On Adultery, Book I.
I know that the question has arisen whether those who have been convicted of
calumny in public trials can testify in a public prosecution. They are not,
however, forbidden to do so by the Lex Remmia; and the Lex Julia relating to
violence, extortion, and peculation, does not prohibit such persons from giving
evidence, nevertheless, what is omitted by the laws should not be omitted by
the conscientious judge, whose duty it is to carefully weigh the credibility of
the witness and determine whether he gives his testimony as a man of integrity
should do.
14. The Same, On Adultery.
I am aware that it has also been discussed whether one who has been convicted
of adultery can give evidence for the purpose of proving a will; and it is
clear that he is justly forbidden from testifying in court. Therefore I think
that a will which must be proved by a witness of this kind is not valid, either
by the Civil Law, or by the Prae-
torian Law which follows it; so that neither an estate can be entered upon, nor
the possession of the property of the deceased be granted on such testimony.
15. Paulus, Sentences, Book II.
A person who has been convicted of extortion cannot testify in the case of a
will, or in a judicial proceeding.
(1) For an hermaphrodite to be qualified to testify in a case of a will it must
be proved which sex is predominant.
16. The Same, Sentences, Book V.
Those who testify falsely, or give conflicting evidence, or betray both sides,
can be punished by competent judges.
17. Ulpianus, Rules.
A father, and a son who is under his control, and also two brothers, subject to
the authority of the same father, can be witnesses in the case of a will, or in
the same transaction; since there is nothing to prevent several witnesses
belonging to one household from testifying in a matter in which another party
is interested.
18. Paulus, On Adultery, Book II.
Since the Lex Julia de Adulteriis prohibits a woman who has been convicted of
adultery from testifying, it follows that even women have the right to give
evidence in court.
19. Ulpianus, On the Office of Proconsul, Book VIII.
Farmers of the revenue cannot be compelled to testify; nor can anyone who has
not absented himself to avoid giving testimony; nor anyone who may be employed
in furnishing provisions to the army.
(1) Nor can wards be required to testify.
20. Venuleius, On Public Prosecutions, Book II.
An accuser should not call as a witness one who has been convicted of a crime,
or who is under twenty years of age.
21. Arcadius, also called Charisius, On Witnesses.
A person who has been convicted of having written a libellous poem is
incompetent to testify.
(1) It is also undeniable that, where the case demands it, not only private
individuals, but even magistrates, if they are present, can be forced to
testify. The Senate also decreed that a Praetor must also give his evidence in a
case of adultery.
(2) Where the circumstances are such that we are compelled to accept a
gladiator, or some person of this kind as a witness, his evidence is not to be
believed, unless he is subjected to torture.
(3) When all the witnesses are of equal integrity and reputation, and the
nature of the transaction, as well as the opinion of the court, coincides with
their assertions, all their testimony should be accepted. Where, however, some
of them make statements different from those made by the others, even the
smaller number of them may be believed.
Moreover, if the evidence corresponds with the nature of the transaction, and
no suspicion of either hostility or favor exists, the judge must confirm the
impressions of his mind by the arguments and testimony which are most
applicable to the case, and which he ascertains to be nearest to the truth. For
it is not necessary to take into consideration the number of the witnesses, but
rather their sincerity, as well as such evidence as appears to be more
illuminated with the light of truth.
22. Venuleius, On the Office of Proconsul, Book II.
The magistrates of every district should be careful to afford facilities to all
who wish to make wills, and themselves be witnesses and sign
wills with others, by means of which matters may be more easily explained, and
the proof of facts be secure.
23. The Same, On Public Prosecutions, Book I.
A witness cannot be produced against a defendant who has already given evidence
against him.
24. Paulus, Sentences, Book V.
It has been decided that witnesses whom an accuser brings from his own house
shall not be examined.
25. Arcadius, also called Charisius, On Witnesses.
It is provided by the Imperial Mandates that Governors shall see that patrons
do not testify in cases which they are conducting; and this rule must also be
observed in the case of those who are transacting the business of others.1
TITLE VI. CONCERNING IGNORANCE OP LAW AND FACT.
1. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XLIV. Ignorance is either of fact or of law.
(1) For where anyone is not aware that he to the possession of whose property
he is entitled is dead, time does not run against him. Where, indeed, he is
aware that his relative is dead, but he does not know that his estate belongs
to him on account of his being the next of kin, or, where he is aware that he
has been appointed an heir, but does not know that the Praetor grants the
possession of the property of a deceased person to those who have been
appointed his heirs; time will run against him because he is mistaken with
respect to the law. The same rule applies where the brother of the deceased
thinks that his mother has the preference.
(2) If anyone does not know that he is related to the deceased, sometimes he is
mistaken concerning the law, and sometimes with
1 The Roman law regulating the competency of witnesses was infinitely more
strict in its application than the Common Law, and excluded much testimony
which, at present, is admitted without question. Great importance was attached
by the jurists of the Republic and the Empire to the fact that the witness was
either in dire poverty, or subject to the dictation of someone high in
influence or authority, which might raise the presumption of bribery or duress
--- a consideration ignored by modern courts of justice; hence beggars were held
to be particularly liable to suspicion. This rule was adopted by the compilers
of both the Visigothic Code and Las Siete Partidas: "Nam videtur esse cavendum
ne forte quisque compulsus inopia, dum necessitatem non tolerat, praecipitanter
perjurare non metuat." (Forum Judicum II, IV, 3.) "Non puede testiguar ome muy
pobre e vil que usasse con malas compaas." (Las Siete Partidas III, XVI, 8.)
Mohammedan Law does not admit the testimony of persons related in either the
direct ascending or descending line, beyond the second degree, in favor of one
another, or that of husband and wife, master and slave, employer and employee.
The evidence of public singers, common drunkards, gamblers, falconers, usurers,
and infidels, is also declared to be incompetent. (The Hedaya II, XXI, 2.) ---
ED.
reference to the fact; for if he is aware that he is free, and who his parents
were, but does not know that he is entitled to the rights of relationship, he
is mistaken as to the law. Where anyone who is a foundling does not know who
his parents are, and serves another as a slave, thinking that he himself is a
slave, he is mistaken rather as to the fact than as to the law.
(3) Moreover, where anyone knows that another is entitled to the possession of
the property of an estate, but does not know that the time during which he
should have taken possession of the same has elapsed, he is mistaken as to the
fact. The same rule applies where he thinks that he has obtained possession of
the property. Where, however, he knows that he has not claimed the estate, and
that he has allowed the time to elapse, but is ignorant that he is entitled to
the possession of the property on the ground of succession, time will run
against him because he is mistaken with respect to the law.
(4) We hold the same where a man is appointed heir to an entire estate, but
does not think that he has a right to demand possession of the same before the
will is opened; but if he is ignorant that there is a will, he will be mistaken
with reference to the fact.
2. Neratius, Parchments, Book V.
Error in law should not, in every instance, be considered to correspond with
ignorance of the fact; since the law can, and should be definitely settled, but
the interpretation of the fact very frequently deceives even the wisest men.
3. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book III.
There is a great deal of difference whether anyone is not informed regarding
the case and acts of another, or whether he is ignorant of the law which
affects himself.
(1) Cassius states that Sabinus holds that it should be understood that
ignorance, in this instance, does not refer to a person of abandoned character,
or to one who, through negligence, thinks himself secure.
4. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XIII.
It is denied that ignorance of the law is of any advantage in usucaption, but
it is established that ignorance of fact is a benefit.
5. Terentius Clemens, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book II.
It seems to be most unjust that knowledge should injure another rather than its
possessor, or that the ignorance of one person should profit another.
6. Ulpianus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book XVIII.
Neither gross ignorance of the facts should be tolerated, nor scrupulous
inquiry be exacted, but such knowledge should be demanded that neither
excessive negligence, too great unconcern, nor the inquisitiveness that
characterizes informers may be exhibited.
7. Papinianus, Questions, Book XIX.
Ignorance of the law is not advantageous to those who desire to acquire it, but
it does not injure those who demand their rights.
8. The Same, Definitions, Book I.
An error of fact does not, indeed, prejudice the rights of men where they seek
to obtain property, or to avoid losing it; and ignorance of the law is no
advantage, even to women, when they attempt to acquire it. A mistake in law,
however, does not injure any person in an attempt to avoid the loss of
property. .
9. Paulus, On Ignorance of Law and Fact.
The ordinary rule is, that ignorance of law injures anyone, but ignorance of
fact does not. Therefore, let us examine to what instances this rule is
applicable, for it may be stated, in the first place, that minors under twenty-
five years of age are permitted to be ignorant of the law; and this also is
held with respect to women in certain cases, on account of the weakness of the
sex; hence, so long as no crime has been committed, but only ignorance of the
law is involved, their rights are not prejudiced.
On the same principle, if a minor under the age of twenty-five lends money to a
son under his father's control, relief is granted him, just as if he had not
lent the money to a son subject to paternal authority.
(1) Where a son under paternal control, who is a soldier, is appointed heir by
a comrade-in-arms, and does not know that he can enter upon the estate without
the permission of his father, he can ignore the law in accordance with the
Imperial Constitution; and therefore the time prescribed for the acceptance of
the estate does not run against him.
(2) Ignorance of the fact, however, does not injure anyone unless he should be
guilty of gross negligence; for example, what if every one in the town knew
what he alone does not? Labeo very properly says that neither the knowledge of
the most inquisitive, or the most negligent man, should be understood to be
meant, but that of him who can obtain it by diligent inquiry.
(3) Labeo, however, thinks that ignorance of the law ought not to be considered
excusable unless the party should not have access to a magistrate, or is not
intelligent enough to easily ascertain that ignorance of the law is a detriment
to him, which is very rarely the case.
(4) Where anyone does not know that the vendor is the owner of the property
sold, more attention should be paid to the transaction itself than to the
opinion of the purchaser; and therefore, although he may believe that he bought
the property from someone who was not its owner, still, if it is delivered to
him by the owner, it will belong to him.
(5) Where a party who is ignorant of the law does not avail himself of the Lex
Falcidia, a Rescript of the Divine Pius says that his
rights will be prejudiced. Moreover, the Emperors Severus and Antoninus stated
the following in a Rescript, namely: "Where, in discharging a trust, money is
paid which is not due, it cannot be recovered, unless it was paid by mistake.
Wherefore, the heirs of Cargilianus, when they paid over money left by will for
the purpose of building an aqueduct for the Republic of Cirta, not only did not
require the bonds which are usually executed to compel the repayment by
municipalities of any excess which they might receive above what was permitted
by the Lex Falcidia; but they even stipulated that the said sum of money should
not be applied to any other purpose, and knowingly and deliberately suffered
the said money to be used for the construction of the aqueduct, hence they had
no right to demand that anything should be returned to them by the Republic of
Cirta, on the ground that they paid more than was due; since there would be
injustice on both sides, for the money to be recovered which had been given for
the purpose of building an aqueduct, and for the Republic to be compelled to
pay out of the funds belonging to it for a work which entirely represented the
glory derived from the liberality of another.
"If, however, the heirs thought that the claim for the recovery of said money
was well founded, for the reason that they failed, through lack of information,
to profit by the provisions of the Lex Falcidia, they should know that
ignorance of fact would be of advantage to them, but ignorance of law would
not; and that relief is granted, not to fools, but to those who are honestly
mistaken with reference to the facts." Although municipalities are mentioned in
this Rescript, still, the same rule should be observed with reference to all
kinds of persons. And while, in the case stated, mention is made of money left
for the purpose of constructing an aqueduct, in this instance alone it must be
held that an action for its recovery will not lie, for the beginning of this
constitution is of general application, as it shows that if, through mistake,
the trust was not discharged, any money paid which is not due cannot be
recovered.
Moreover, that section is also of general application which sets forth that
parties are not entitled to recover who, through ignorance of the law, did not
avail themselves of the benefit of the Lex Falcidia; and, according to this, it
can be stated that if money which was left in trust and had been paid, had not
been left for some specified purpose, even though it had not been expended but
remained in the hands of the person to whom it was paid, an action to recover
it will not lie.
10. Papinianus, Opinions, Book VI.
Youths who have not arrived at puberty and act without the authority of their
guardians are not considered to know anything.
