THE CIVIL LAW
INCLUDING
The Twelve Tables, The Institutes of Gaius, The Rules of
Ulpian, The Opinions of Paulus, The Enactments
of Justinian, and The Constitutions of Leo:
Translated from the original Latin, edited, and compared with all accessible
systems of jurisprudence ancient and modern.
By S. P. SCOTT, A. M.
Author of "History of the Moorish
Empire in Europe," Translator of
the "Visigothic Code"
IN SEVENTEEN VOLUMES VOL. VI.
CINCINNATI THE CENTRAL TRUST COMPANY
Executor of the Estate Samuel P. Scott, Deceased
PUBLISHERS
CONTENTS OF VOLUME VI.
THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS.
(Continued.)


BOOK XXIV.
TITLE I. PAGE CONCERNING DONATIONS BETWEEN HUSBAND AND WIFE  302
TITLE II. CONCERNING DIVORCES AND REPUDIATIONS  335
TITLE III. PAGE IN WHAT WAY THE DOWRY CAN BE RECOVERED AFTER THE MARRIAGE HAS BEEN DISSOLVED  3




THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS.
BOOK XXIV.


THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS. BOOK XXIV.
TITLE I. CONCERNING DONATIONS BETWEEN HUSBAND AND WIFE.

1. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXII.
In accordance with the custom adopted by us, gifts between husband and wife are
not valid. This rule has been adopted to prevent married persons from
despoiling themselves through mutual affection, by setting no limits to their
generosity, but being too profuse toward one another through the facility
afforded them to do so.

2. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
Another reason is that married persons might otherwise not have so great a
desire to educate their children. Sextus Caecilius also added
marriage based on affection and obviate any manifestation of insolent
superiority of the part of the wife arising from the consciousness of her
greater wealth, Lycurgus abolished the bestowal of dowries in Sparta, a
regulation which, as might be presumed from the avaricious propensities of a
large portion of mankind, did not long survive him.

Where the wife brought a dowry, the husband was expected to settle real
property upon her as an equivalent, in order to provide a home for her in case
he died, or a divorce was obtained. (Potter, Antiquities of Greece, 1, 202, IV,
11.)
The law of the Visigoths declared the gift of a dowry to be an indispensable
requisite to maintain the future honor and dignity, of the conjugal relation.
"Nam ubi dos nec data est, nec confirmata, quod testimonium esse potest in
coniugii dignitate futura?"
To prevent the bridegroom from impoverishing himself by excessive liberality,
it was provided that he could not legally bestow as dowry more than one-tenth
of his entire property. (Forum Judicum, III, I, 1, 6.)
Under the Salic Law, if a widower wished to marry again, he was prohibited from
giving the dowry of the first wife to the second; and he could not sell, or
give it away until his children became of age. If he had no issue by his first
wife, her next of kin could claim two-thirds of her dowry, provided they left
out of it two beds, two covered footstools, and two chairs; if they failed to
do this they would be entitled to only a third of it. "Si uero de anteriorem
uxorem filios non habuerit, parentes qui proximi१res sunt mulieris defuncti
duas partes dotis recoligant et duos lectaria demittant, dua scamna coperta,
duo cathedras. Quod si istud non fecerint, tertia sola de dote recoligant;
tamen si per adfatimus antes non cromauerint." (Lex Salica, LXXII, 1, 2.)
As appears from the text, there were two kinds of dowry at Civil Law, the
profectitious, given by the father to his daughter, and the adventitious, which
owed its origin to anyone else, including the bride herself. Where it was
expressly stipulated that in case of dissolution of the marriage the dowry
should be returned to the donor, it was called dos receptitia, a provision
instituted for the benefit of a third party, usually not a relative. The
husband was invested with the entire administration of the dowry as well as the
income derived from it, but he could neither sell nor encumber it, even with
his wife's permission, if it consisted of real estate; a rule which, however,
was not applicable to personal property, which he could dispose of at his
pleasure. Marriage was essential to render the constitution
still another, namely, because marriage would often be dissolved where the
husband had property and could give it, but did not do so; and therefore the
result would be that marriage would become purchasable.

3. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXII.
This reason is also derived from a Rescript of the Emperor Antoninus, for it
says: "Our ancestors forbade donations between husband and wife, being of the
opinion that true affection was based upon their mutual inclination, and also
taking into consideration the reputation of the parties who were united in
matrimony, lest their agreement might seem to be brought about for a price, and
to prevent the better one of the two from becoming poor, and the worse one from
becoming more wealthy."
of a dowry valid: "Neque enim dos sine matrimonio esse potest."The donatio
proptor nuptias, or ante-nuptial gift, differed from the dowry in that it was
given by the husband for the use of the wife, in case he died before her, and
in this respect it resembled the English dower. If she died first, it reverted
to him, but if she survived him, the right to it vested absolutely in her.
In the preservation and management of the dowry, the husband was bound to
exercise the strictest diligence to avoid being responsible, unless he could
show that he had employed the same care with reference to it that he was in the
habit of employing in the conduct of his own affairs, and if this fact was
established, he could only be held liable for gross negligence.
It was the custom among the Germans, as we learn from classic writers, for the
bridegroom to endow the bride, as is done at present, from which fact the
modern custom is undoubtedly derived. The old Anglo-Saxon laws of England
provided that if a woman's husband was convicted of murder, and she was
acquitted of complicity in the crime, she could retain her marriage gifts and
dower. "Si misericordia Dei et rectum suum salvaverit, remaneant legales cum
maritagiis suis et dotibus." (Ancient Laws and Institutes of England; Leges
Regis Edwardi Confessoris, XIX.)
Marriage by capture, the primal method of securing a wife, was by degrees
succeeded by marriage by purchase, and conjugal union thus became a purely
business transaction. Among the Anglo-Saxons, the bride was sold by her father
or guardian, the price being dependent upon the rank of the parties. While
performance of the contract could not be enforced against him who had the
disposal of the woman, he could be sued for damages for non-delivery, as in the
case of any other chattel. The ceremony of betrothal, when perfected,
practically constituted the formal matrimonial union, and while religious rites
accompanied marriage they were considered of but little consequence. The
compensation, at first paid to the father or guardian, was subsequently, when
the contract became a legal fiction, bestowed upon the bride as a dotal gift.
"The marriage having been consummated, and the bridal night having passed,
another present is given by the husband to his newly made wife, called the
morgengifu, or morning gift. This was not essential to the legality of the
marriage, but was a voluntary gift from the bridegroom to the bride. This form
being at first a gift of some chattel of little value, such as a trinket or
ornament, to show the husband's appreciation of his bride, became a gift of
large value, generally of realty, and as a rule, in later times was stipulated
for on betrothal. This gift became recognized as a sum to support the widow
upon the death of the husband, and if none were given, the law allowed a
certain amount for this purpose as morning gift. From this it will easily be
seen has sprung the dowry of the English law. (Barrell, An Outline of Anglo-
Saxon Law, Page 58.)
The right of dower, as known to us, is the opposite of what was understood by
the term dos among the Romans, although both can be traced to the barbarian
cere-

(1) Let us see between what persons donations are prohibited; and, indeed, if a
marriage is solemnized in accordance with our customs and laws such a donation
will not be valid. It will be valid, however, if any impediment should arise so
that marriage cannot be contracted. Therefore, if the daughter of a senator
marries a freedman in violation of the Decree of the Senate, or if a woman in a
province, in opposition
mony of marriage by purchase, which in practice is not, even now, obsolete.
This radical difference of signification is thus referred to by Glanvil: "In
alia enim acceptione accipiunt Dos secundum Leges Romanas, seeundum quas
proprie appelatur Dos id q'd cum muliere datur viro quad vulgariter dicit
Maritagium." (Glanvil, Tract, de Leg. et Consuet. Angliae, VII, I.) The Latin
coemptio, the ancient fictitious sale, by means of which autocratic parental
authority over the bride was transferred to the bridegroom, was concluded by
her payment of an as to her husband, which was symbolical of the delivery not
only of her person, but of all her property or peculium, as well, and was
absolutely confirmed by uninterrupted cohabitation for the period of a year.
Five different classes of dower are mentioned by Littleton, namely: by Common
Law, by custom, ad cotium ecclesiae, ex assensu patris, de la plus belle. The
right had reference to one-third of such lands and tenements as belonged to the
husband during coverture, which, at Common Law, was known as dos legitima.
Under the customs of certain towns and countries of England, the wife was
entitled to half the estate of her deceased husband, and under those of others,
to all of it.
When a woman was endowed at the church door, after her husband died she could
enter upon the premises thus publicly designated without any other assignment
of the same.
Dower ex assensu patris was constituted by a son who was the heir of his father
and embraced land held by the latter, and was thus encumbered with his consent.
Endowment de la plus belle, or of the best part of a tract of land, referred to
the privilege a widow enjoyed of selecting a third of certain real property in
which she had an interest as guardian in socage of her infant son, who was at
the same time the ward in chivalry of the lord of the deceased.
A wife was not entitled to dower in lands of which her husband was joint owner
with another. (Littleton, Tenures, I, V, 36-45.)
Among Moslems, dower is considered by many legal authorities as a consideration
paid for the usufruct of the wife, in other words the purchase-money of
property sold. It is held to be so essential that, if not mentioned in the
ante-nuptial contract, liability for its payment will be held to exist, as a
matter of course. It can be composed of anything which possesses or may possess
an actual value, except wine, blood, carrion or a hog, and its value cannot be
less than ten dirhems, or about ninety cents. No limit is placed to its amount
above that sum, the pecuniary circumstances of the bridegroom, as well as his
generosity, being presumed to establish its value and regulate its payment.
While many wives do not exact it during the lifetime of their husbands, it is
regarded as a legal debt and must be settled in case of divorce, or after the
death of the husband, it being a first lien on his estate after the funeral
expenses are paid. (Tagore, Law Lectures, page 34; The Hedaya, IV, X.)
A debt or a credit is assignable as dower. "It is lawful for a man marrying a
woman to fix for her dowry anything which may be due to him from her, or which
may be due from somebody else.
"If a man fix for dower a profit, that also will be lawful, for example,
residence in a house, or the right of riding on an animal, the right of
cultivation, etc."
"A free man may assign to his wife his own services in lieu of dower." (Syed
Ameer Ali, Mohammedan Law, Vol. II, XI, 12.)
A release of her right of dower before, or at the time of her marriage is void;
but after the ceremony she can, if she so desires, discharge her husband from
liability for it, or return anything which she may have received. It is not
impera-
to the Imperial Decree, marries an official who is discharging his duties
there, the donation will be valid, because such a marriage is
void.
But it is not right that donations of this kind should be valid, nor that the
condition of those who are guilty of an offence should be improved; still, the
Divine Severus, in the case of the freedwoman of
tive that the dower be constituted before marriage, as this may be done
subsequently.
The French Code provides that all property included in the marriage contract
shall be dotal, unless the contrary is expressly stated therein. The husband
may be compelled to furnish a bond to insure its safe-keeping and proper
administration. Real estate given as dowry cannot be alienated or hypothecated,
unless this was explicitly authorized by the ante-nuptial agreement, and only
under circumstances which render this step extremely advisable, or necessary.
The husband is liable as an usufructuary, and if the marriage should be
dissolved he must return the property composing the dowry at once, if it
consists of land, and after the lapse of a year, if it consists of money or
other personal effects, unless the latter should be appraised and the ownership
vested in him.
"Tout ce que la femme se constitue ou qui lui est donn़ en contrat de mariage
est dotal, s'il n'y a stipulation contraire."
"Le mari n'est pas tenu de fournir caution pour la reception de la dot, s'il
n'y a pas ़t़ assujetti par le contrat de mariage."
"Le mari est tenu, a I'egard des biens dotaux, de toutes les obligations de
l'usufruitier." (Code Civil de France, Arts. 1540-1566.)
In Spain, relatives of the bride, or strangers, may endow her either before or
after marriage; the husband, however, can only do so before the performance of
the ceremony. The father or mother of the wife is obliged to provide a dowry
for every one of their legitimate daughters; which must equal in amount half of
the share of the estate to which each would legally be entitled. The husband is
compelled to register in his own name the real property composing the dowry,
and execute a mortgage for the same in favor of his wife, for a sum not
exceeding its appraised value. If the dowry has not been appraised, and the
wife is of age, she can, with the consent of her husband, dispose of or
hypothecate the property of which it is composed. Where the marriage is
dissolved or declared void, immediate restitution of the property appraised as
dowry can be demanded of the husband or his heirs.
"Pueden constituir dote a favor de la muyer, antes २ despu़s de contraer el
matrimonio, los padres y parientes de los esposos y las personas extra०as a la
familia."
"El padre २ la madre २ el que de ellos viviese estेn obligados े dotar a sus
hijas legitimas."
"El marido estे obligado े inscribir े su nombre ़ nipotecar en favor de su
muier los bienes inmuebles y derechos reales que reciba como dote estimada."
(C२digo Civil de Espa०a,Arts. 1336-1352.)
In Italy, any future acquisitions that may accrue to the bride are not held to
be embraced in the dowry, unless especially provided for when it was
constituted, and this cannot be done, nor can any additions be made to it after
marriage. If the movable property of which the dowry is wholly or partly
composed is diminished or worn out by use, without the fault of the husband, he
will only be required to return what remains in its present condition.
"La costituzione di dote espressa, in termini generici di tutti i boni della
donna non comprende i, boni futuri."
"Se i mobili la cui proprietॆ resta alla moglie, si sono consumati coll' uso e
sensa colpa del marito, egli non ् tenuto a restituire che i remanenti, e nello
stato in cui si trovano." (Codice Civile Regno d'ltalia, Arts. 1388-1415.)
The Code of Portugal directs that money forming part of a dowry shall, within
three months after marriage, be invested in land or good securities, and be
hypothecated to the wife. If this is omitted, the money is not considered as
included in

Pontius Paulinus, a Senator, rendered a different decision because the woman
had not been treated with the affection to which a wife was entitled, but
rather with that due to a concubine.
(2) Those who are under the control of the same person are forbidden to make
gifts to one another; as, for instance, the brother of a husband who is under
the control of the father-in-law of the wife.
(3) We apply the term "control" not only to children but also to slaves, for it
is the better opinion that those who are subject to the husband by any law
cannot make such donations.
(4) Hence, if a mother makes a gift to her son who is under the control of his
father, the gift will be of no effect because he acquires it for his father.
If, however, she gives it to him while he is a soldier and is about to leave
for the camp, it is held that the gift will be valid, because it is acquired by
the son, and forms part of his castrense peculium.Wherefore, if a son or
stepson, or any other person subject to the authority of the husband, makes a
gift out of his castrense peculium it will not be void.
(5) Therefore a person who is under the control of the father-in-law is
prohibited from making presents to the wife and the daughter-in-law, provided
the husband is under the control of the father.
(6) The wife and daughter-in-law, on their part, are forbidden to make gifts to
a husband or a son-in-law. Moreover, a gift will not be valid where it is given
to those under their control or under the control of the parties to whose
authority they are subject; provided the husband and father-in-law are under
the control of the same person, or the husband is under the control of the
father-in-law. Moreover, where the husband belongs to another family, neither
the father-in-law nor
the dowry, and it becomes the property of herself and her husband as joint
owners. When the dowry is given by the parents or grandparents of the bride,
they will be responsible for its value in case of eviction. This does not apply
to strangers, except in case of fraud, or where liability has been established
by special agreement.
"Se no dote, quer esta seja constituido pela mulher, quer pelo inarido, quer
por outrem, for incluido dinheiro, sera esta convertido, dentro de tres nueses,
contados desde o casamento, em bens inmoveis, inscricoes de assentamento, on
accoes de companhias, ou dado a juros, par escritura publica, com hypotheca."
"Se o dote tiver sido constituido pelos paes o pelos avos da dotada, serao os
dotadores responsaveis pela importancia d'elle no caso de eviccॅo." (C२digo
Civil Portugu।z, Arts. 1140, 1142.)
Neither dowry nor the right of dower is recognized by Japanese jurisprudence.
The husband, or the wife if she is the head of the family, must bear all the
expenses arising from marriage, no provision for which is made either
previously, or subsequently by a gift or settlement in favor of either. (Civil
Code of Japan, Art. 798.)
The English rule regulating the right of dower, with some unimportant
modifications, has been generally adopted by statute in the United States, with
the exception of Louisiana, where the ancient Civil Law doctrine of dowry
prevails. A dowry there may consist of real or personal property, or of both,
and the person who gives it is obliged to warrant the title to the same. The
statutory provisions, for the most part, exactly coincide with those of France.
The right of dower is not known to the law of Louisiana, but ample provision is
made for the widow by means of the community of property established ipso facto
by marriage. (Civil Code of Louisiana, Arts. 2317-2334: 2309-2378.) --- ED.


anyone under his control, nor anyone subject to the authority of the latter, is
forbidden to receive a gift from the wife.
(7) A mother-in-law is not prohibited from bestowing gifts upon her daughter-
in-law, or vice versa, because in this instance the right of paternal authority
is not involved.
(8) If my slave, in whom another enjoys the usufruct, gives a present to my
wife out of his peculium which does not belong to me, or a freeman who is
serving me in good faith as a slave does this; the question arises, will such a
donation be valid? In the case of a free person, indeed, a donation can be
permitted to a certain extent, but others have no right to alienate their
peculium by giving it away.
(9) Not only are husband and wife themselves not permitted to make donations,
but other persons cannot do so.
(10) Moreover, it should be remembered that gifts between husband and wife are
forbidden to such an extent that they are void by operation of law. Hence, if a
certain article is to be given, its delivery will not be valid, and if a
promise is made to a party making a stipulation, or if he is released from
liability for a debt, the transaction will not be valid; for, by operation of
law, any transaction entered into by husband and wife with reference to a
donation will be of no effect.
(11) Therefore, if a husband gives money to his wife, it will not become her
property, because it is evident that she cannot acquire the ownership of the
same.
(12) If, however, a husband should order his debtor to pay the obligation to
his wife, in this instance, the question arises whether the money becomes hers,
and whether the debtor will be released. Celsus states in the Thirteenth Book
of the Digest that it would seem that it cannot be held that the debtor is
released, and that the money becomes the property of the husband and not of the
wife. For if the donation is not prohibited by the Civil Law, the result of the
transaction will be that the money would come into your hands from your debtor,
and then pass from you to your wife; since through the rapidity with which the
two acts are united, one of them is obscured. It does not appear, however, to
be either novel or strange for a debtor to pay a creditor and the creditor to
pay his wife, because it is understood that you yourself receive what you
obtain at the hands of another. For in case anyone who pretends to be the agent
of your creditor receives money from your debtor under your direction, it is
settled that you will be entitled to an action for theft, and that the money
itself is yours.
(13) This opinion confirms what Julianus stated in the Seventeenth Book of the
Digest, namely: that if I should direct someone who is about to make me a
present to give to my wife, the transaction will be of no effect, for it would
be considered just as if I had received it myself, and, having become my
property, I gave it to my wife. This opinion is correct.

4. Julianus, Digest, Book XVII.
The same rule applies if I should direct a person who is about to make a
donation mortis causa, to me, to make it to my wife; nor does
it make any difference whether the donor recovers, or dies. Nor should it be
held that, if we say that this donation is valid, I would become any the
poorer, because if the donor recovers, I will be liable to a personal action;
but if he dies, I will cease to have the property which otherwise would have
been included among my possessions, because of my having donated it.

5. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book II.
Where a man who desires to make a gift to his betrothed gives it to Titius, in
order that he may bestow it upon the woman, and Titius delivers it after the
marriage has taken place; if the husband employed him as an intermediary, the
donation made after the marriage took place will not be valid. When, however,
the woman employed him, and the donation has already been made for some time,
that is before marriage, therefore, although Titius delivered it after the
marriage was celebrated, the donation will be valid.
(1) Where a husband had two debtors, Titius and his wife, and he releases the
wife from liability by way of a gift, neither party will be released because
the discharge of the woman is void. This Julianus also states in the
Seventeenth Book of the Digest. It is evident that if you suppose that Titius
is discharged, he will indeed be released from liability, but the woman will
still be liable.
(2) Generally speaking, it must be held that any transaction involving a gift
which has reference to married persons themselves, or to others that are
interposed, will not be valid. If the affair is mixed, and concerns other
property and persons in such a way that the components cannot be separated, the
donation will not be prevented; but if they can be separated, the other parts
of the transaction will be valid, but the donation will not be.
(3) Where a debtor of the husband, by the direction of the latter, promises his
wife the money which he owes, the promise is void.
(4) Where a wife, for the purpose of making a donation to her husband, promises
to pay his creditor and gives a surety; Julianus says that the husband will not
be released, or the wife or her surety be liable, and the result will be just
as if she had not made any promise.
(5) Julianus also says with reference to sales, that where one is made of
property for a price less than its value, by either husband or wife, it will be
of no effect. Neratius, however (whose opinion Pomponius does not reject), says
that where a sale is made between husband and wife as a donation, it is of no
effect; provided that the husband did not have the intention of selling the
property, but merely pretended to do so, in order that he might donate it. For,
in fact, if he had the intention of selling it and remitted a portion of the
price to the woman, the sale would be valid, but the remission of the price
will be void to the extent of the profit which accrues to the woman. Hence, if
property which is worth fifteen aurei is sold for five, and its value is only
ten, the woman must refund only five aurei, because she is considered to have
profited by that amount.
(6) Where a wife, or a husband, fails to make use of a servitude by way of a
donation, I think that the servitude is lost; but, after a divorce, it can be
recovered by an action.
(7) Where a wife, or a husband, consents to be barred by an exception for the
purpose of making a donation, a decision rendered by a judge granting a release
will be valid; but an action can be brought against the party who has obtained
the advantage.
(8) A donation of a burial-place is permitted, for it is settled that a husband
can give a burial-place to his wife, and, on the other hand, that she can give
one to him. If the party who receives it buries anyone there, the place will
become religious. This arises from the fact that it is usually stated that a
donation only is forbidden which has a tendency to make the giver poorer, and
the receiver richer. Hence, in this instance, a party is not held to become
more wealthy by the acquisition of property dedicated to religious purposes.
Nor should the statement have any weight that the woman would have purchased
another burial-place, if she had not received this one from her husband; for
although she would have become poorer if her husband had not given it to her,
still, she does not become more wealthy, for the reason that she is at no
expense.
(9) This also affords ground for the opinion that if a husband should donate
land for a burial-place to his wife, it is understood that it only becomes hers
when a dead body is buried therein. For, before the place becomes religious, it
remains the property of the donor, and therefore if the woman should sell it,
it will, nevertheless, continue to remain his property.
(10) According to this, if a husband should give his wife a monument of great
value, which had not been used, the donation will be valid, but it would only
be valid when it became religious.
(11) Even if the woman herself should be buried there, although the marriage
was terminated by her death, still, the place would become religious through
favorable interpretation.
(12) Hence, if a husband should give his wife something as an offering to God,
or land upon which she has promised to erect some public work, or to build a
public temple, the place will become sacred. If, however, he should give her
anything to be donated or consecrated to God, there is no doubt that the gift
will be valid. Wherefore, if he furnished her with oil to be used in a temple,
the donation will be
valid.
(13) Where a husband is appointed an heir, and rejects the estate for the
purpose of making a donation to his wife; Julianus says in the Seventeenth Book
of the Digest that the donation is valid. For he does not become any the poorer
by not acquiring the property, for he only does so who loses his own patrimony.
The rejection of the estate by the husband benefits the wife if she should be
substituted, or should become heir ab intestato.
(14) In like manner, if a husband rejects a legacy, we hold that the donation
is valid if the woman is substituted with reference to the legacy, or even if
you suppose that she was appointed the heir.
(15) Where anyone is asked to deliver an estate to his wife after reserving a
certain amount of it for himself, and he delivers it without any deduction,
Celsus says in the Tenth Book of the Digest that the husband is considered
rather to have acted with a more conscientious sense of his duty in the
delivery of the property than to have donated the same.
Celsus gives a very just reason for this opinion, for a great many persons, in
a case of this kind, rather consider that they are discharging their duty than
that they are donating anything, and that where they make a more ample delivery
of property belonging to another, than they are required to do, they are
complying with the wishes of the deceased, and are not paying out anything of
their own; and it is not without reason that we often think that the deceased
desired something to be done which he did not request.
This opinion is more applicable to a case where a man was asked to deliver an
estate, and did not reserve the fourth to which he was entitled, but still
discharged his trust, after neglecting to take advantage of what was granted by
the Decree of the Senate. For he, indeed, discharged his trust having carried
out the wishes of the testator. This is the case where he did not make an error
in the calculation, but there is no doubt that he would be entitled to an
action for the recovery of money which was not due, and which he had paid in
the execution of the trust.
(16) Therefore, when nothing is paid out of the property, it is rightly held
that a donation between husband and wife will be valid; for it is valid where
the party who makes the donation does not diminish his or her means; and the
donation will still be valid even if the property should be diminished,
provided the one who receives it does not become more wealthy thereby.
(17) Marcellus asks in the Seventh Book of the Digest whether the donation will
be valid where a woman received money from her husband and expended it in
behalf of one of her relatives who held the rank of centurion. He says that it
will be valid, for the woman did not become more wealthy by the transaction,
any more than if she had borrowed the money in order to pay it in behalf of her
relative.
(18) Moreover, with reference to donations forbidden by the Civil Law, the gift
may be revoked in such a way that, if the property is still in existence, it
can be recovered from him or her to whom it was given. But if it has been
consumed, a personal action will lie to recover the amount to which either of
the parties has been enriched.

6. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XL
Whatever is retained by reason of a donation which is not permitted by law, is
understood to be retained without any reason, or unjustly; in either of which
instances a right of action for recovery will ordinarily arise.

7. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXI.
Moreover, what time should be considered in order to determine whether the
parties have profited pecuniarily: should it be the date
when issue was joined, or that when judgment was rendered? The time when issue
was joined should be taken into consideration, and this our Emperor and his
father stated in a Rescript.
(1) Where a husband gives his wife money for the purchase of perfumes, and she
pays it to his creditor, and afterwards purchases perfumes with her own money;
Marcellus says in the Seventh Book of the Digest that she will not be held to
have profited by the transaction. He also says that if he should give her a
dish for the same purpose, and she should keep it, and purchase perfumes with
her own money; the husband would not be entitled to an action to recover the
dish, because the wife has not become any the more wealthy, as she spent an
equal sum for something which was perishable.
(2) Where a man and his wife give one another the sum of five aureiand the
husband keeps his, and the wife spends hers, it was very properly decided that
there was a set-off of the two gifts; and this the Divine Hadrian decreed.
(3) Marcellus also says that if a man should give money to his wife, and she
should purchase land with it, an estimate should be made as to how much the
woman had profited by the transaction. Hence, if the land was of very little
value at present, we must hold, in consequence, that its value at the time
issue was joined should be taken into consideration. It is evident that if the
land is of great value, only the amount which was paid must be refunded, and
not the interest of
the price.
(4) A nice question arises where a woman purchases land for fifteen aurei, and
her husband does not pay the entire price but only two-thirds of the same, that
is to say, ten aurei; and his wife pays five out of her own money; and at the
present time the said land is only worth ten aurei, how much will the husband
be entitled to recover? The better opinion is that he should recover two-thirds
of ten, and that what is lost of the price should be equally borne by the
husband
and wife.
(5) Where a husband alleges that he has increased the value of property which
he received as dowry, for the purpose of benefiting his wife, our Emperor and
his father stated a remedy for this in a Rescript as follows: "As you say that
the price of the property was increased for the purpose of benefiting your
wife, the magistrate who has jurisdiction of the matter shall decide that if
you refuse a certain proportion of the money, you must return the land itself,
after having deducted the reasonable expenses which you have incurred." It is
therefore left to the choice of the husband to deliver whichever he
prefers.
The same rule of law applies if, on the other hand, the woman makes complaint
of a diminution in the value of the property. The principle is the same as that
ordinarily followed where property is lent for use after appraisement; as
Pomponius states in the Fourth Book of Various Extracts.
(6) Where a wife purchases from her husband lands which she had received as
security for the return of her dowry, and the said pur-
chase is said to have been made for the purpose of benefiting her, the
transaction will be void. But our Emperor and his father stated in a Rescript
that the obligation of pledge will continue to exist. I give the words of this
Rescript in order that it may be established that a bona fide sale made between
husband and wife cannot be annulled. "If your husband sold you pledges given to
secure your dowry and money which had been loaned him, not for the purpose of
benefiting you, and the transaction was concluded in good faith, it will be
valid. But if it is shown that this was only done under pretext of making a
donation, and consequently the sale will be held to be void, your right to the
property pledged will remain unimpaired by public law."
(7) If a wife buys an article, and her husband pays the purchase money for it,
it is sometimes held that the entire property can be recovered from the woman
as she has become pecuniarily benefited with reference to the whole of it; just
as where a woman purchases property and owes the price of the same, and her
husband releases her from the claim of the vendor. For what difference does it
make whether he pays her creditor or the vendor?
(8) A certain man gave a slave to his wife under the condition that she would
manumit him within a year. If the woman should not comply with the wish of her
husband, does not the Constitution of the Divine Marcus confer freedom upon the
slave, whether the husband is still living, or whether he is dead? Papinianus
says, as the opinion of Sabinus has been accepted, who thinks that the slave
only begins to become the property of the party to whom he was given at the
moment when freedom was granted him, that therefore the woman cannot manumit
him after the specified time has elapsed, even if she should desire to do so;
that the Imperial Constitution is not applicable, nor can the will of the
husband render it applicable, since he could manumit his own slave. I also
approve this opinion, because neither the vendor nor the donor desires to, or
can impose any condition upon himself, but he can do so upon the party who
receives the slave. Therefore the ownership remains with him, and the
Constitution is not operative.
(9) A donation made for the purpose of manumission is valid; although this may
be done, not with the understanding that freedom shall be granted immediately
but within a certain time. Hence, if a husband gives his wife a slave to be
manumitted after a specified period, the slave does not become hers until she
begins to manumit him, after the expiration of the said period. Wherefore, if
he should be manumitted before that time her act will not be valid, for it must
be remembered that if anyone gives his wife a slave to be manumitted within a
year, and she does not manumit him within the year, but does so afterwards, her
act will be void.
8. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XI.
If, before the slave is manumitted, the marriage should be dissolved by death
or divorce, the donation will be annulled; for it is held
to be a condition of such a donation that the slave should be manumitted during
the marriage.
9. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXII.
If a husband gives his wife a slave under the condition that he shall never be
granted his freedom, it must be held that a donation of this kind is absolutely
void.
(1) Where a woman, having received money from a slave, manumits him or imposes
certain services upon him as a condition of his freedom, Julianus says that
these services are legally imposed, that the obligation will stand, and that
the woman is not held to have profited by the property of the husband, since
the slave promises his services
as freedman.
Where, however, the woman receives the money of the slave for his manumission,
and manumits him on this account; if he paid the money out of his peculium, it
will still remain the property of the husband, but if anyone else paid it for
the slave it will become the property of the woman. This opinion is founded
upon justice.
(2) Donations mortis causa can take place between husband and wife,

10. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XI.
For the reason that the event of the donation extends to a time when the
parties cease to be husband and wife.

11. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXIII.
In the meantime, however, the property does not immediately pass to the person
to whom it is given, but only when death takes place, and therefore, during the
intermediate time, it remains in the hands of the donor.
(1) What is said with reference to the validity of donations mortis causa
between husband and wife is so true that, according to Julianus, not only a
donation made with the intention that the property shall belong to the wife or
husband will be valid when death takes place, but also every donation mortis
causa will confer ownership of the object of the same upon him or her.
(2) Therefore, when a donation is not retroactive difficulties arise, as
Marcellus states in the following instance: "A husband wished to make a certain
donation mortis causa to his wife, and the latter interposed a son under
paternal control who was to receive the donation and give it to her; then,
after the husband died, he who received the gift became his own master. Is the
delivery valid?" He says that the delivery must be held to be valid, because
the son became his own master at the time to which the delivery was deferred,
that is to say, when the husband died.
(3) He also says that he knew that it was the opinion of Sabinus, that where a
husband delivered property to his wife mortis causa while she was under
paternal control, the donation with all its ad-
vantages would belong to her if she should become independent during the
lifetime of her husband. This opinion is also approved by Julianus in the
Seventeenth Book of the Digest.
(4) Hence, if a wife should give property mortis causa to her husband while he
was under paternal control, and he should become his own master, we say,
without hesitation, that the property will be his.
(5) Moreover, on the other hand, if a wife should make a donation mortis causa
to her husband while he is the head of the household and, at the time of her
death, he should be subject to paternal control, the entire benefit of the
donation will be acquired by the father.
(6) Consequently Scaevola states in a note on Marcellus that if a woman
interposes a slave for the purpose of delivering to her a donation mortis
causa, and he delivers the property to the woman, and he should afterwards be
free at the time of the death of the husband, the same rule must be held to
apply.
(7) Marcellus also holds that if he who was interposed should die after he has
given the property to the woman, while the donor is still living, the donation
will be extinguished, because it should for some space of time become the
property of the person interposed, and from him pass to the woman. This occurs
where the woman to whom the property is given, and not the donor, causes the
interposition of the third party. For if he was interposed by the husband, the
title to the property immediately vests in him, and if he should deliver it
before the death of the husband and then die, the delivery would be effective
to a certain extent, but it would still be in suspense until the death of the
donor took place.
(8) If a wife gives property to Titius in order that he may deliver it to her
husband mortis causa, and, after her death, Titius should deliver the property
to the husband against the consent of the heirs, it makes a difference whether
Titius was interposed by the woman, or by the husband to whom the property was
donated. If he was interposed by the wife, he will be liable to a personal
action for recovery, if he delivered the property to the husband; but if he was
interposed by the husband at the death of the wife, ownership of the land
immediately vests in him whom the husband interposed, and the latter will be
entitled to a right of action against him.
(9) If a wife gives property which she has received from her husband mortis
causa to anyone else, such a gift will be void, because the title does not vest
in the woman until the last moment of the life of her husband. It is clear that
in those cases in which it is agreed that the donation shall be retroactive, a
delivery made by the wife will be in abeyance.
(10) If a husband makes a gift to his wife, and she is afterwards divorced,
will the donation be annulled? Julianus says that the donation will be void,
and is not dependent upon any condition.
(11) He also says that a donation made on account of a divorce is valid:

12. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
Provided, however, that the donation was made at the very time of the divorce,
and not after deliberation, while the parties were contemplating a divorce.

13. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXII.
If, however, death did not result, the property would not be held to belong to
the woman, because the donation had been made with reference to another event.
(1) Hence, if a husband makes a donation mortis causa to his wife, and suffers
banishment; let us consider whether the donation will be valid. It is held that
a donation made to become operative in the case of banishment is valid, just as
in the case of divorce. Therefore, as marriage is not dissolved by banishment,
and the woman is in no way to blame, it is only in accordance with humanity
that a donation mortis causa made in the first place to be confirmed by an
exile of this kind should be valid, just as it would be if the husband should
die. This is true, however, only to the extent that the husband may not be
deprived of the right to revoke it, because it is necessary to wait for his
death in order for the donation to have complete effect; whether he revoked it
at the time of his death, or whether he still remains subject to the penalty.
(2) Where anyone receives property for the purpose of building on his own
ground, it cannot be recovered from him, because it is considered to have been
a gift. This was also the opinion of Neratius, who says: "When property has
been given for the purpose of building a house or for sowing land, anything
else that he who receives it fails to do will come within the scope of the
donation." Therefore gifts of this kind will be forbidden between husband and
wife.

14. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LXXI.
Where a husband gives money to his wife for the rebuilding of a house belonging
to her, which has been destroyed by fire, the donation is only valid to the
amount required for the construction of the house.

15. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXI.
What a husband gives to his wife, by the year or by the month, can be revoked
to the extent of the surplus, if it exceeds the bounds of moderation, that is
to say, if it amounts to more than the income of the dowry.
(1) If a husband should give money to his wife and she collects the interest
from it, she will profit by it. Julianus in the Eighteenth Book of the Digest
stated this opinion with reference to a husband.

16. Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book X.
But what if out of a sum of a hundred aurei, which a husband presented to his
wife, fifty should be lost through a debtor, and the wife
should have the other fifty doubled by the interest? The husband cannot recover
more than fifty from her on account of the said donation.

17. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXII.
Let us also consider with reference to the crops of land which are donated,
where the woman profits pecuniarily, whether they form part of the donation.
Julianus says that the crops, as well as the interest, constitute a lawful
gift.
(1) Where a slave who is donated acquires any property, it will belong to him
who donated him.

18. Pomponius, On Various Extracts, Book IV.
Where either a husband or a wife uses the slaves or the clothing belonging to
the other, or lives gratuitously in the house of the other, such a donation is
valid.

19. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXII.
Where a wife gives a slave to her son who was under the paternal control of her
husband, and the said slave then acquired a female slave, the title to the
latter will vest to the woman. Julianus says that it makes no difference with
whose money the said female slave was purchased, because nothing can be
acquired, even with his own property, through the slave by the donee, for this
privilege is granted only to bona fide possessors. Where, however, he knows
that the slave belongs to another, he is not his bona fidepossessor.
(1) He also asks, where the female slave was purchased with the property of the
husband, whether the latter can, by means of an exception, retain the price of
said slave against his wife when bringing an action for her dowry. It must be
said that, according to the opinion of Marcellus, the husband is entitled to an
exception where he is sued for the dowry, and, according to Julianus, if he
should pay it, he can bring suit for the recovery of the purchase-money.

20. Javolenus, Epistles, Book XI.
If a slave, who is given mortis causa to a wife before her husband dies, should
enter into some stipulation, I think that the effect of the obligation would
remain in abeyance until the husband is either dead, or is free from the danger
of death on account of which he made the donation, and if either of these
events takes place by which the donation is annulled or confirmed, this also
will either confirm or annul the stipulation.

21. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXII.
Where a husband pays for his wife a sum which she owes on account of a journey
taken by her, has he a right to collect the amount on the ground that she was
pecuniarily benefited thereby; or can it be held that this is not a donation? I
think that the better opinion is that this is not prohibited, especially if she
took the journey for
the sake of her husband; for Papinianus states in the Fourth Book of Opinions
that a husband cannot recover the travelling expenses of his wife and her
slaves where the journey was undertaken in his
behalf.
A journey is held to have been made in behalf of a husband, when his wife comes
to seek him; and it makes no difference whether anything had been agreed upon
in the marriage contract with reference to travelling expenses or not, for he
does not make a donation who meets necessary expenses. Hence, if the wife made
the journey with the consent of her husband, on account of the requirements of
his business, and the husband gives her something for expenses, it cannot be
recovered.
(1) Where a wife promises a dowry to her husband, as well as the interest on
the same, it must undoubtedly be held that he can collect the interest; because
this is not a donation, as the interest is demanded to meet the expenses of
marriage.
What would be the case, however, if the husband should remit the claim for
interest to his wife; would the same question remain with reference to the
legality of the donation? Julianus says that it would, which is correct.
It is evident that if it should be agreed that the wife shall support herself
and her slaves, and her husband permits her to enjoy her dowry for the purpose
of maintaining herself and the members of her household, the question will be
disposed of; for I think that her husband could not demand of her, as a
donation, what had already been set off.

22. The Same, On Sabinus, Book III.
A man gave a slave mortis causa to his wife, and then appointed him his heir
with the grant of his freedom. The question arises, is such an appointment
valid? I think that if he appointed him his heir because he said that he
changed his mind, the appointment will be valid, and the slave will become the
necessary heir of his master. But if after he appointed him his heir, he gave
him away, the donation will have greater weight; or if he gave him away before
he did this, but still did not grant him his liberty with the intention of
depriving him of it, the result will be the same.

23. The Same, On Sabinus, Book VI.
Papinianus very properly thinks that the Rescript of the Divine Severus relates
merely to the donation of property; hence if the husband bound himself by a
stipulation for the benefit of his wife, he does not hold that the heir of the
husband can be sued, even though the husband should die without having changed
his mind.

24. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
Where a donation is made between persons who are not married, and who are
united before the time prescribed by law for acquiring the ownership of
property; or, on the other hand, if a donation is made between husband and
wife, and before the above-mentioned time has
elapsed, the marriage is dissolved; it is settled that the time of the
prescription, nevertheless, continues to run, because, in the first instance,
possession is transferred without any defect, and in the second the defect
which existed is removed.

25. Terentius Clemens, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book V.
Where, however, during the existence of the marriage, property belonging to
someone else is given by a husband to his wife, it must be said that the wife
is immediately permitted to begin to hold it by usucaption, because, although
it was not given to her mortis causa, its usucaption will not be prevented. For
the law, as established, has reference to those donations by which the wife is
enriched, and the husband becomes poorer; and therefore a donation mortis causa
may take place --- just as is understood to be made between persons who are not
married --- with reference to property which can be acquired by usucaption,
because it belongs to another.

26. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
If I order someone who has sold me property to give it to my wife as a
donation, and he transfers possession of the same to her under my direction, he
will be released from liability; because, although under the Civil Law she will
not be understood to have possession of said property, it is evident,
nevertheless, that the vendor has nothing which he can deliver.
(1) Neratius says that the same reasons which permit donations to take place
between husband and wife, also render legitimate those made between a father-
in-law and a son, or a daughter-in-law. Therefore, a father-in-law can make a
donation to his son-in-law in expectation of death or divorce, and a son-in-law
also, can make one to his father-in-law in view of the occurrence of either of
these events.

27. Modestinus, Rules, Book VII.
A donation made before marriage between parties who are about to contract
matrimony is valid by law, even if the marriage should take place upon the same
day.

28. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
Where the property donated is destroyed or consumed, the loss must be borne by
the donor. This is reasonable, because the property still belongs to him who
gave it, and he loses what is his own.
(1) Where a husband incurs any expense with reference to children born of
female slaves who constitute the dowry of his wife, either on account of
instruction or support; this will be of no advantage to the husband, because he
himself is making use of their services. He can, however, keep an account of
whatever was given to their nurse for rearing them, because he is providing
something for the preservation of their lives; just as if he had ransomed
slaves forming part of the dowry from robbers.
(2) Where slaves of the husband have performed services for the wife, or vice
versa, the better opinion is that no account should be taken of what they have
done; and, indeed, the law applying to prohibited donations should not, in this
instance, be strictly construed, as among individuals who are hostile to one
another; but this should be done as among persons united by the greatest
affection, and who are merely apprehensive of want.
(3) When a woman purchases a slave for ten aurei, which have been given to her
by her husband, and the slave is only worth five, it is held by Plautius that
only five can be recovered; just as where, if the slave should die, nothing can
be recovered. If, however, the slave was worth fifteen aurei, the husband
cannot claim more than ten, since he has only become poorer to that amount.
(4) But if the woman purchased two slaves, and one of them should die, and the
other is worth ten aurei, the question arises, what shall be done? Pomponius,
and the greater number of authorities, think that it makes a difference whether
the two slaves were sold for one price, or each for a different one. If they
were sold for one price, the entire ten aurei can be recovered, just as where
an article which has been bought becomes deteriorated, or where a flock or a
vehicle is sold, and any portion of the same is destroyed; but if the slaves
were sold for different prices, that amount can only be recovered for which the
surviving slave was purchased.
(5) Pomponius states that Julianus was of the opinion that, where a wife
acquires anything through a slave who had been purchased with money given to
her by her husband, whether it be a legacy, an estate, or children born of
female slaves, the husband will also have a right to recover it on this ground.
(6) It is settled that if a wife, before receiving her annual income from her
husband, spends any of his money, or any which has been borrowed, she will be
held to have taken the amount expended out of her annual income.
(7) Celsus says that it was very properly decided that, where a wife has
stipulated for annual interest on her dowry, although the interest may not be
due because the arrangement was made for yearly payments, the woman cannot
bring an action on dowry, but the parties can set off their claims. Therefore,
we hold that the same rule will apply to any agreement which is entered into
with reference to annual payments.

29. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XIV.
If a woman should sell a slave purchased with money given to her by her
husband, and then buy another, Fulcinius held that the woman must be
responsible for the loss of the last slave. This is not true, even though the
second slave was not purchased with money belonging to the husband.
(1) Where a husband gives wool to his wife and she makes clothing for herself
out of it; Labeo says that the clothing belongs to the wife.

30. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XL
Still, the husband will be entitled to an equitable action.

31. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XIV.
Where, however, a husband makes clothing for his wife out of his own wool,
although this is done for his wife and through solicitude for her, the
clothing, nevertheless, will belong to the husband; nor does it make any
difference whether the wife assisted in preparing the wool, and attended to the
matter for her husband.
(1) Where a wife uses her own wool, but makes garments for herself with the aid
of female slaves belonging to her husband, the garments will be hers, and she
will owe her husband nothing for the labor of the slaves; but where the
clothing is made for her husband, it will belong to him, if he paid his wife
the value of the wool.
Where, however, the wife did not make the clothing for her husband, but gave it
to him, the donation will not be valid; as it will only be valid when the
clothing is made for her husband, and she will never be permitted to render a
bill for the labor of her husband's female slaves.
(2) If a husband should give a lot to his wife in order that she may erect a
house upon it, there is no doubt that the house will belong to the husband; but
it is settled that the woman will be entitled to her expenses, for if the
husband should claim the house, the wife can retain the expenses she incurred
in building.
(3) Where there were two slaves, each of them worth five aurei,but both of them
together were sold for five by a husband to his wife for the purpose of
benefiting her, or vice versa; the better opinion is that they are held in
common by the two parties in proportion to the price; for indeed it is not to
be considered what the slaves are worth, but how much of the price has been
remitted by way of donation.
There is no doubt that either a husband or a wife can purchase property from
one another for less than it is worth, if there is no intention of making a
donation.
(4) If a husband should sell anything to his wife for its true value, or vice
versa, and for the sake of making a donation, and they agree that the vendor
shall not furnish any guarantee with reference to the property, it should be
considered what the agreement was with reference to the sale, whether the
property was actually sold and the entire transaction was a valid one, or,
indeed, if only the latter part of the agreement was void; just as if it would
be when the purchase had been concluded, the agreement had been made after a
change of mind. The better opinion is that only the latter part of the
agreement is void.
(5) We hold that the same rule will apply if, for the purpose of making a
donation, the parties agree that the vendor shall not guarantee that a slave is
in the habit of running away, or is a vagabond; that is to say, the rights of
action under the Edict of the नdiles and on purchase shall remain unimpaired.
(6) Where a man owes his wife a sum of money payable at a certain time, he can
pay it at once without fear of it being considered a donation, although if he
had retained the money until the time it was due, he could have enjoyed the
advantage of its use.
(7) If you are about to bequeath me a legacy, or leave me a portion of your
estate, and are requested to do so, you can leave it to my wife, and this will
not be considered a donation, because my property is in no way diminished; and
Proculus says that the principal reason why our ancestors came to the aid of
the donor was in order that one of the parties might not be despoiled through
affection for the other; but they were not so evil disposed as to wish to
prevent one of them from becoming wealthier.
(8) Where a husband makes his wife a very valuable gift on the Kalends of March
or on her birthday, this is a donation; but if his wife should incur any
expense by which she may be more honorably maintained, the contrary opinion
must be held.
(9) A wife is not considered to have become any more wealthy if she spends
money given to her by her husband for banquets, for perfumes, or for food for
her slaves.
(10) Provisions which a husband furnishes for the slaves or the horses of his
wife, and which belong to them in common, cannot be > recovered by him. I think
that the contrary rule should be observed, however, where he supports the
domestic slaves of his wife, or those which are kept for sale.
32. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXIII.
This was the condition of the laws with reference to donations between husband
and wife, as we have previously stated, when our Emperor Antoninus, before the
death of his father the Divine Severus, in an Address delivered to the Senate
during the consulship of Fulvius नmilianus and Nummius Albinus, caused the
Senate to relax to some extent the strictness of their provisions.
(1) The Address of our Emperor with reference to the confirmation of donations
not only has reference to property obtained by a husband in the name of his
wife, but also to all donations made between a husband and wife; so that by
operation of law, the property belongs to the party to whom it is donated,
gives rise to a civil obligation, and comes within the scope of the Lex
Falcidia, where this can become operative. I think that this law will apply,
because what is donated is, as it were, confirmed by will.
(2) The Rescript says: "It is wrong for anyone who makes a donation to change
his mind, but it would be hard and avaricious for the heir to take the
property, when this, perhaps, would be contrary to the will of the party who
donated it."
(3) We should understand this to refer to the change of mind of the donor in
his last moments, for if he had made a donation to his wife and then changed
his mind, and afterwards changed it again, it must be said that the donation is
valid, as we are considering the man's last wishes, just as we are accustomed
to do with reference to
trusts, when we discuss an exception interposed on the ground of fraud, as the
will of the party may be undetermined up to the last moment of his existence.
(4) Where, however, the donor changes his mind only once, we grant his heir the
right of revocation, if it is perfectly evident that the deceased changed his
mind. But if this is doubtful, the judge should rather incline to confirm the
donation.
(5) If a husband should pledge the property he donated, we are inclined to hold
that he has changed his mind, although he still retains the ownership of the
property. What course, however, should be pursued if it was his intention for
the donation to continue to exist? Suppose that the property remained in the
possession of the woman under a precarious title, and that she was ready to
satisfy the creditor? It must then be held that the donation is valid. For if
the husband gave the property to her in the first place with this intention, I
should say that the donation was valid, so that if the woman was prepared to
satisfy the creditor, she will be entitled to an exception on the ground of bad
faith; and, moreover, if she should pay the debt, she could, by means of an
exception on the ground of bad faith, cause the right of action of the creditor
to be assigned to her.
(6) Where the donor becomes the slave of a private individual, it must be said
that the donation is not perfected, but is destroyed, although servitude is
compared to death. Hence if the woman to whom the donation is made should be
reduced to slavery, the donation will be extinguished.
(7) Where a husband made a donation to his wife, and, on account of remorse for
some crime, committed suicide, or, even after death, his memory was rendered
infamous, the donation will be revoked; though gifts which he made to others
will be valid where he did not make such donations mortis causa.1

[1] A donatio mortis causa in many respects resembles a will, but is applicable
only to personal property. It differs from a donatio inter vivos in that the
latter is irrevocable. To be valid at Civil Law, it was essential that it be
made in expectation of death or some other immediate impending danger, and that
it be absolute, for where it was in any way contingent it was of no force or
effect. The donor must have testamentary capacity (testamenti factio); and if
the beneficiary was not qualified to take under a will, it was also void.
Acceptance by the latter during the lifetime of the donor was indispensable;
and as in case of a will, five witnesses were required to be present at the
same time. A minor could make a donatio causa mortis without the permission of
his curator, and a son under paternal control could do so if his father
consented, although he was prohibited from making a will. The gift, even if
delivery had already been made, was revocable at any time before the death of
the donor, when it legally vested; and, being personal, if the donee died
first, it was ipso factoextinguished. While delivery was not necessary under
the Roman Law, it is in England, as well as in Scotland. (Vide Stephen,
Commentaries on the Laws of England, II, II, IV; Erskine, Principles of the
Laws of Scotland, LII, III, 37.) Although the donor does not have to be in
extremis to render his act valid, it must be performed in contemplation of
death and with the understanding that it will result from his present illness.
The principles above stated are generally applicable in the United States. ---
ED.

(8) Likewise, where a husband who is in the army, makes a donation out of his
castrense peculium, and afterwards is convicted of a crime; for the reason that
he will be permitted to testify with reference to property of this kind even
after having been convicted, provided he obtains the right to do so, the
donation will be valid; for he who is permitted to give evidence can make a
donation mortis causa.
(9) The Rescript says, "Has consumed," and this term we must understand to mean
that he who received the donation has not become any more wealthy thereby. If,
however, he has been pecuniarily benefited, the advantage conferred by the
Rescript will not be applicable. But if he has not become any more wealthy, and
has given an amount equal to the donation to the other party, it must be said
that if the one who died was enriched, the other can recover what he gave, and
is not obliged to set off what he has consumed, although where a divorce takes
place, a set-off of this kind can be made.
(10) If a divorce should take place after the donation, or if the party who
made the gift should die first, the ancient law must be observed; that is to
say, the donation will be valid if the husband desires the wife to have it, but
if he does not, it shall be extinguished; for many married persons separate
well disposed toward one another, and many others cherish anger and hatred.
(11) But what if a divorce takes place, and the marriage is afterwards re-
established, and the mind of the donor is either changed during the divorce, or
remains the same; or, when the marriage is re-established, the wish of the
donor becomes as it was in the first place; will the gift remain valid if the
donor should die while the marriage is still in existence? It can be maintained
that it will be valid.
(12) If, however, a divorce should not take place, but only a slight
misunderstanding should arise, it is certain that the donation will be valid if
the misunderstanding is removed.
(13) Where a wife and her husband have lived for a long time separated, but
still preserve the matrimonial bond (which we know sometimes happens with
persons of consular rank), I think that donations will not be valid, since the
union has always existed; for marital affection, and not coition, constitutes
marriage. Where, however, the donor dies first, the donation will then be
valid.
(14) What shall we say where both parties, the one who made the donation and
the one to whom it was made, are captured by the enemy? And before I venture to
discuss this question, the Address of the Emperor which decided that a donation
is of no force or effect if the party to whom it is given should die, must be
considered. Therefore, if both parties should die, either through shipwreck, or
the fall or the burning of a house, what shall we say? Where, indeed, it can be
established which one of them died first, the question is readily disposed of,
but if this cannot be proved, the question becomes difficult, and I am rather
of the opinion that the donation will be valid, as we gather from the words of
the Address, for it says: "If the party who received
the donation should die first." But when both of them die at the same time it
cannot be held that the one who received the donation was the first to depart
from life. Hence, it is very properly held that, where they have made donations
to one another, both of these will be valid if the parties die at the same
time, because, although neither one survived the other, the Address did not
contemplate the death of both together.
Where, however, neither survived the other, the mutual donation will be valid,
for it must be said with reference to mutual donations mortis causathat an
action for recovery can be granted to neither of the parties, and therefore
that the heirs of both profit by the donations. In accordance with this view,
if both parties are captured by the enemy at the same time, and both die while
in captivity at different times, must the date when they were taken captive be
considered to enable us to hold that the donations are valid; just as if both
had died at once? Or shall we say that neither donation is valid, because the
marriage was terminated during the lifetime of the party in question? Or shall
we ascertain which one of them died first, in order to decide that the donation
with reference to him was not valid; or whether, if the other should return to
his country, his will be valid?
It is my opinion that where the parties do not return, the time when they were
taken captive should be considered, just as if they had died then; but if one
of them should return, he will be held to have survived because he did so.
(15) When a husband bequeaths certain property out of that which he had already
donated, but fails to donate the rest, he is not held to have been unwilling
that the remainder should belong to his wife; for frequently a party makes a
bequest, and afterwards a donation, or some other reason may have existed for
his making the bequest.
(16) The Address not only includes husband and wife, but also other parties who
are also prohibited from making donations on account of marriage; as for
instance, where a father-in-law makes a donation to his daughter-in-law, or
vice versa; or a father-in-law to his son-in-law, or vice versa;or one of two
fathers-in-law who have the parties united in marriage under their control
makes a donation to the other; for, in accordance with the spirit of the
Address, all these persons are permitted to make donations under the same
circumstances.
This was also held by Papinianus in the Fourth Book of Opinions, for he said:
"A father-in-law made a donation to his daughter-in-law, or to his son-in-law,
and afterwards, one or the other of them died during marriage. Although the
defect in the donation continues to exist, still, if the father-in-law did not
raise any question with reference to said donation, the terms of the Address
will be held to operate against his heirs after his death, for the same reason
which prohibits a donation of this kind demands that the benefit be afforded."
Therefore, in order that such a donation may be valid, Papinianus requires that
the son of the party who made the donation shall die before him, and that the
father-in-law shall die afterwards, without having changed his mind.
(17) Where a son under paternal control, who has a castrense, or a quasi
castrense peculium, makes a gift to his wife, we must take into account the
person of the son, and his death.
(18) If a daughter-in-law makes a donation to her father-in-law, we must
consider her death and the continuance of her will until her last moments.
Where, however, her father-in-law dies first, we hold that the donation will be
extinguished. But if the husband should live, and survive his wife, must we
admit that the donation will take effect? If indeed, the husband becomes the
sole heir of his father-in-law, a new donation can be said to have been made
for the benefit of the husband, so that where the former ends, the other
begins; and where the son is not the heir of his father, the donation will be
terminated for another reason.
(19) If the father-in-law repudiates his daughter-in-law, the donation will be
void, even though the marriage, when the husband and wife agree, still
continues to exist, in accordance with the Rescript of our Emperor; but the
marriage will be at an end with reference to the parties among whom the
donation is made.
(20) Hence if two fathers-in-law make donations to one another, the same rule
will apply if they repudiate their son and daughter-in-law, and the donations
they make to one another will be void. Where, however, a donation of this kind
is made between fathers-in-law, the death of him who made it during the
marriage and while the right of paternal control existed is required to render
the donation valid.
The same rule also applies to those who are under the control of the
said parties.
(21) Where one father-in-law makes a donation to another, and one, or both of
them emancipate the persons who are united in marriage, it must be held that
this donation has no reference to those mentioned in the Address, and therefore
it becomes void.
(22) Where a man makes a donation to his betrothed which is to take effect at
the time of the marriage, although the donation is not considered to have been
made between man and wife, and the words of the Address do not expressly apply
to it, still, the donation must be said to come within its scope, and it is
valid if the will of the party continues the same until his death.
(23) The donation will become operative whether the property was actually
donated, or an obligation was released; as for instance, where a man releases
his wife from liability for what she owes him, by way of a donation, it can be
said that the release itself is not in suspense, but that its effect is.
Generally speaking, all the donations which we have mentioned as being
prohibited, will be valid according to the terms of the Address.
(24) Where a partnership is contracted between husband and wife by way of
donation, it is void according to the ordinary rule of law, nor does the
liberal construction of the Decree of the Senate grant such an advantage that
it can be held that an action on partnership will lie; still, the property
which they hold in common cannot be revoked in accordance with the terms
prescribed by their agreement. There-
fore, an action on partnership will not be available, because that is not a
partnership which is interposed for the purpose of the advantage of only one of
the parties, even where this is done by others; and for this reason it does not
become operative between husband and wife.
(25) The same must be said where a purchase is made by way of donation, for it
is void.
(26) It is evident that if, for the purpose of making a donation, property is
sold for less than it is worth, or if the price should afterwards be remitted,
we must concede that the donation is valid, in accordance with the Decree of
the Senate.
(27) Where a man had a betrothed and afterwards married her when it was not
lawful for him to do so; let us see whether donations made, so to speak, during
betrothal, are valid. Julianus discusses this question with reference to a
minor of twelve years of age who had been brought to the home of her so-called
husband while she was still too young to be married; and he says that she is
his betrothed, but she is not his wife.
The better opinion, however, is the one held by Labeo, by myself, and by
Papinianus in the Tenth Book of Questions, which is that if the betrothal
preceded the alleged marriage it will continue to exist, although the party who
married the girl may think that she is his lawful wife. Where, however, it did
not precede the marriage, there can be no betrothal, as it did not take place,
nor did any marriage, because it could not be celebrated. Therefore, where the
betrothal came first, the donation is valid, but where it did not, it is void
because the party did not make the donation, as it were, to a stranger, but to
his supposed wife, and therefore the Address will not apply.
(28) Where, however, a senator betroths himself to a freedwoman, or a guardian
to his ward, or any other of those persons who are forbidden to contract
marriage does so, and afterwards marries the girl; will a donation made, as it
were, during betrothal, be valid? I think that such betrothals should be
rejected, and whatever property has been donated should be seized and
confiscated by the Treasury, as having been bestowed upon persons who are
unworthy to hold it.

33. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XXXVI.
Where a husband agrees to pay his wife a certain sum annually, she cannot bring
an action on the stipulation during the marriage. But, if while the marriage is
still in existence, the husband should die, I think that, because the donation
has reference to an annual payment, the stipulation can be enforced under the
Decree of the Senate.
(1) On the other hand, where a wife makes an agreement with her husband to pay
him a certain sum every year, this can be refunded to her, and she can bring an
action to recover what remains. I think that she can also bring a personal
action for the amount to which her husband is enriched; because the annual
allowance which a husband pays to his wife is not as important as that which a
wife pays to her husband, for this is inconsistent, and contrary to the nature
of the sex.
(2) If the husband stipulated with his wife for annual payments, and the woman
should die during marriage, it must be said that the donation will become valid
under the Address.

34. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XLIII.
If the wife should either give property to her husband and he should bestow it
by way of dowry on behalf of their common daughter, or if she should permit him
to give it by way of dowry for their daughter, after having made a donation to
her husband; it can be held, in accordance with justice, that although the
donation is of no force or effect, still, the gift of the dowry becomes valid
by the subsequent consent of the wife.

35. The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXIV.
If the divorce did not take place in accordance with the prescribed lawful
formalities, donations made after such a divorce are of no effect, since it can
not be held that the marriage was dissolved.

36. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXVI.
Where property which has been donated is still in existence, it can also be
recovered by a suit; but for the reason that a donation carries with it the
right of possession, if the property is not returned, an appraisement for its
just value can be made, and security against eviction should be furnished to
the possessor for the amount that the property is worth. This opinion was also
adopted by Pedius.
(1) A man sent a ring which belonged to another as a gift to his betrothed, and
after the marriage he gave her one of his own instead of it. Certain
authorities (Nerva for instance), think that this ring became the property of
the woman, because the donation which had been made is held to have been
confirmed, and not a new one given. This opinion I think to be correct.

37. Julianus, Digest, Book XVII.
Where a woman committed fraud to prevent the preservation of property given to
her by her husband, or to avoid its production in court, he can bring an action
against her for injury committed, if she did this after a divorce had taken
place.

38. Alfenus, Epitomes of the Digest by Paulus, Book III.
Where a slave, held in common by a husband and his brother, gave a young slave
to the wife of the brother, it was held that the gift was not valid so far as
the share belonging to the husband, which the slave had given, was concerned.
(1) The law will be the same where one of three brothers has a wife and gives
her property held in common by them all, for one-third of the gift will not
belong to the wife; but with reference to the other two-thirds, if the brothers
knew that they were given, or, after this Was done, they confirm the act, the
woman will not be obliged to make restitution.

39. Julianus, On Minicius, Book V.
A husband who wished to give a sum of money to his wife, permitted her to make
a stipulation with his debtor. She did so, but before having received the
money, she divorced herself from her husband. I ask whether the latter can
recover the entire amount, or whether an action based on the promise will be
void on account of the donation. I answered that the stipulation will be of no
effect. If, however, the promisor, not being aware of the facts, should pay the
woman, and the money has not been expended, the debtor can recover it.
But where he is ready to assign his rights of action to the husband, he will be
protected by an exception on the ground of fraud, and therefore the husband can
recover this money by an action in the name of the debtor.
If, however, the money is not in existence, and the woman has become more
wealthy on account of it, the husband can claim it; for it is understood that
the woman has become more wealthy through having received property belonging to
her husband, since the debtor can protect himself by an exception on the ground
of fraud.

40. Ulpianus, Opinions, Book II.
Where property is given to a husband by his wife for the purpose of obtaining
some office, the donation will be valid to the extent that it was necessary to
provide the office for her husband.

41. Licinius, Rufinus, Rules, Book VI.
For the Emperor Antoninus decided that a wife could give property to her
husband for the purpose of furthering his interests.

42. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XI.
Another reason for a donation has been recently introduced through the
indulgence of the Emperor Antoninus, which we say is done for the sake of
honor; for example, where a wife makes a donation to her husband to enable him
to seek admission into the Senatorial, or Equestrian Order, or for the purpose
of exhibitions.

43. Paulus, Rules.
A donation can be made between husband and wife in case of exile.

44. Neratius, Parchments, Book V.
Where a stranger gives property belonging to a husband to the wife of the
latter, both of them being ignorant of this fact, and where the husband also
does not know that he has donated property belonging to himself, the woman can
lawfully acquire said property by usucaption. The same rule of law will apply
where anyone who is under the control of the husband, believing himself to be
independent, makes a gift to his father's wife.
If, however, the husband should ascertain that the property was his before its
title by usucaption vests, he can recover it, and her pos-
session will be interrupted; even though the husband does not wish for this to
be done, and the woman becomes aware that it is his; because this is an
instance where the woman herself knows that the donation was made by her
husband. It is more proper to hold that no impediment to the acquisition of the
ownership of the property by her exists; for women are not absolutely
prohibited from acquiring the property of their husbands, except where
donations are made to them by the latter.

45. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVII.
Marcellus states in the Seventeenth Book of the Digest that the husband can
even remove his property without injury to his wife, and without fear of the
Decree of the Senate, where the transaction which has taken place between them
is illegal.

46. The Same, On the Edict, Book LXXII.
Possession of property does not necessarily imply a donation of the same
between husband and wife.

47. Celsus, Digest, Book I.
The question as to whether the husband, in the discharge of his duties while
transacting the business of his wife, has incurred expenses with reference to
her property, is one of fact, and not of law. A conjecture based on the amount
and character of the expenses incurred by him will not be difficult.

48. The Same, Digest, Book IX.
Whatever a husband gives to his wife still remains his property, and he can
recover it, nor does it make any difference if he has been left large bequests
by his wife.

49. Marcellus, Digest, Book VII.
Sulpicius to Marcellus. A woman who wished that, after her husband died, her
land should pass to the common son of her and her husband who was under the
control of his father, transferred the land to her husband, in order that he
might leave it to his son after his death. I ask whether you think that the
donation is of such a character as to render the transaction void, or whether,
if it is valid, the woman will have the power to revoke it, if she is unwilling
to allow it to stand?
The answer was, if a pretext or an excuse (so to speak), is sought for the
gift, the delivery will not be valid; that is, if the wife expected that her
husband would reap any advantage from it in the meantime. Otherwise, if she
only made use of the services of her husband, and he gave them so that she
might be able to revoke the donation; or, in order that the property with all
its emoluments might pass through the father to the son, why should it not be
considered valid, just as if the transaction had taken place with a stranger,
that is to say,
if the property had been delivered to him under the same circumstances?

50. Javolenus, Epistles, Book XIII.
Where a woman buys a slave for twenty aurei, and her husband pays five to the
vendor at the time of the purchase, if a divorce takes place, he can certainly
recover this sum. It makes no difference whether the slave has become
deteriorated in value, or even if he should be dead, the husband will still be
entitled to demand the five aurei; for the question arises, as to whether the
woman has become enriched by the property of her husband, at the time when the
question as to the return of the dowry arose. She is, in this instance,
understood to have been pecuniarily benefited by having been released by the
intervention of her husband from liability for a debt, which she would still
have owed, if her husband had not paid the money. Nor does it make any
difference for what reason the woman owed the money, that is to say, whether it
was borrowed, or whether she owed it on account of some purchase.
(1) Where the woman did not buy the slave, but received the money from her
husband in order to buy him, then, in case the slave should die, or become
depreciated in value, the loss must be borne by her husband, because, as she
would not have purchased the slave if she had not received the money from her
husband, he who gave it must bear the loss, provided the slave died; nor is the
woman considered to have become enriched who was not released by her creditor,
and is not in possession of what she purchased with her husband's money.

51. Pomponius, On Quintus Mucius, Book V.
Quintus Mucius says that when a controversy arises as to whether anything has
come into the hands of a wife, it is better and more honorable to hold that the
property came into her hands through her husband, or through someone who is
under his control, where it is not proved from what source she obtained it.
Quintus Mucius appears to have adopted this opinion, for the purpose of
avoiding any disgraceful inquiry with reference to a wife.

52. Papinianus, Questions, Book X.
Where a man, for the purpose of benefiting his wife, leases property to her for
a very small sum, the transaction is void. Where, however, a deposit takes
place between the parties at a low appraisement, for the purpose of benefiting
one of them, it will be valid. These opinions are different, because the lease
cannot be made without a certain rent, but a deposit can be made without any
valuation of the property.
(1) A wife provided that the crops of a tract of land should be given to her
husband by her heir, and if this should not be done, she promised a certain sum
of money mortis causa. The husband, having died during the life of the wife,
the stipulation was extinguished, as well as the delivery which was made mortis
causa by the direction of
the latter; for in an instance where a personal action for the recovery of
property will lie among strangers, this will not take place among married
persons.

53. The Same, Opinions, Book IV.
It is settled that a father-in-law cannot make a donation to either his son-in-
law or his daughter-in-law mortis causa, because if the father-in-law should
die, the marriage will not be dissolved; nor does it make any difference
whether the father disinherited his son or his daughter, or not. In case of
divorce the rule is different for the same
reason.
(1) A woman made use of property which had been given by way of dowry, after it
had been appraised with the consent of her husband. If the said property
becomes deteriorated by use, a set-off of the damage will not be permitted. Nor
can the woman maintain that the property has been, as it were, left to her
under the terms of the will, by which bequests were made to her by her husband;
since an assumption of this kind does not seem to have given her, or deprived
her of the said property.

54. The Same, Opinions, Book VIII.
A husband stipulated for the interest on a promised dowry, but did not claim
it. As he had maintained his wife and her slaves for the entire time of the
marriage, at his own expense, and left her the dowry as a preferred legacy, as
well as confirmed by the ordinary legal formalities of a trust the donations
which he had given her, it was held that the interest of the dowry was not
included in the legacy, but had been remitted by the terms of the donation.

55. Paulus, Questions, Book VI.
A wife gave a sum of money to her husband, and the latter purchased either
personal or real property with this money which had been given him, and, as he
was not solvent, and the property was still in existence, I ask, if the wife
should desire to revoke the donation, whether she can legally proceed by a
personal action for recovery; for the husband, although he is insolvent, seems
to have profited by the donation, since the property acquired with the money of
his wife was still in his possession.
I answered that it could not be denied that he had profited by the donation,
for we do not inquire what property he may have released from liability from
debt by means of it, but what property of his wife he has in his possession.
For he does not differ from one to whom her property has been given, except in
the mere fact that in this instance, the property still belongs to the wife,
and she can recover it by means of a direct action.
The condition of the husband will be worse if suit is brought against him for
the sum that the property is worth, and not for the amount in excess of the
gift, than if he should be sued in an action on dowry. There is nothing,
however, to prevent the woman from
also bringing an equitable real action for the recovery of her own property.

56. Scaevola, Questions, Book III.
If I wish to give my wife absolutely, something which another person desires to
give her mortis causa, what I order to be given to her will be void; because if
the aforesaid party should regain his health, I will be liable to a personal
action for recovery, and if he should die, I will, nevertheless, become poorer,
for I will not have what I ought to be entitled to.

57. Paulus, Opinions, Book VII.
Where a woman received from her husband a sum of money by way of a donation,
and wrote to him in the following terms: "When, at my request, my dearest lord,
your indulgence granted me twenty aurei for the purpose of despatching certain
business of mine; which sum was paid to me under the condition that if, through
any fault or bad conduct of mine, our marriage should be dissolved during our
lifetime; or if I should leave your house without your consent; or should
repudiate you without any cause of complaint; or if it should be proved that a
divorce was obtained on my account; I promise that, in any of these instances,
I will repay and return to you without any delay, the twenty aurei, which you
have this day consented to give me by way of donation."
I ask whether in case this woman should repudiate her husband, Titius, she must
refund the money. Paulus was of the opinion that the money which the husband
gave to the wife in accordance with the terms set forth in the stipulation can
be recovered, if the condition was fulfilled, since then it is transformed from
a donation into a loan. Where, however, the condition of the stipulation is not
shown to have taken place, only that amount can be recovered by which the wife
is proved to have been enriched by the donation which was made.

58. Scaevola, Opinions, Book II.
Where lands and slaves were given to Seia during concubinage, and were
afterwards returned by her at the time of her marriage, and others received in
their stead, what is the law? The answer was that, according to the facts
stated, a business transaction seems rather to have been concluded than a
donation to have been made.
(1) Also, when a question arises with reference to the food of slaves, the
answer was that sustenance given during the time of concubinage cannot be
recovered, nor even such as was furnished during the time of marriage, if the
slaves were used by the wife as well as the husband.
(2) Where a son was accustomed to transact the affairs of his mother, and
slaves and other property were purchased with her money by her consent, and he
drew up the bills of sale in his own name, and died while still under the
control of his father; the question arose
whether his mother could institute proceedings against her husband, and if she
could, what action she could make use of. The answer was that if the mother
intended that her son should be liable for said money, she would be entitled to
an action De peculio against the father under whose control the son was, within
a year after the latter died; and if she donated the property, she could
recover it to the extent that the father profited by the said donation.

59. Paulus, Opinions, Book II.
Where anyone makes a donation to his wife under the condition that she shall
receive what he gives her by way of dowry, and he dies, the donation will
become valid.

60. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book II.
A stepfather and a stepson are not forbidden to make donations to one another
on the occasion of marriage.
(1) Donations are permitted between husband and wife in case of divorce; for
this often happens either on account of the husband entering the priesthood, or
because of sterility,

61. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XL
Or where marriage cannot conveniently exist on account of old age, illness, or
military service,

62. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book II.
And for these reasons the marriage is dissolved with a friendly disposition.
(1) A donation made between husband and wife, or between patron and freedwoman,
is not confirmed where a divorce takes place or marriage is not solemnized. If
a donation has been made, and a divorce has taken place between the parties, it
is not shared between them, where the woman is not permitted to obtain a
divorce from her husband against his consent. Hence the donation is considered
as if it had not been given, where a divorce occurs under such circumstances.

63. Paulus, On Neratius, Book III.
Where materials belonging to a wife are joined to a building of her husband in
such a way that if removed they can be of any use, it must be held that the
woman can bring an action, for the reason that none is authorized by the Law of
the Twelve Tables, although it is not probable that the Decemvirs did not have
in mind parties by whose consent their property was joined to the buildings of
others. Paulus remarks that, in this instance, proceedings can only be
instituted in such a way that a suit for the recovery alone of the property
when removed from the building will lie in favor of the wife, and not one for
double damages in accordance with the Law of the Twelve Tables; for whatever is
included in the building with the knowledge of the owner of the same is not
stolen.

64. Javolenus, On the Last Works of Labeo, Book VI.
A man gave something to his wife after a divorce had taken place, to induce her
to return to him; and the woman, having returned, afterwards obtained a
divorce. Labeo and Trebatius gave it as their opinion in a case which arose
between Terentia and Maecenas, that if the divorce was genuine, the donation
would be valid, but if it was simulated, it would be void. However, what
Proculus and Caecilius hold is true, namely, that a divorce is genuine, and a
donation made on account of it is valid, where another marriage follows, or the
woman remains for so long a time unmarried that there is no doubt of a
dissolution of the marriage, otherwise the donation will be of no force or
effect.

65. Labeo, Epitomes of Last Works, by Javolenus, Book VI.
Where a man makes a donation to a woman who is not yet marriageable, I think
that it will be valid.

66. Scaevola, Digest, Book IX.
Seia, when about to marry Sempronius on a certain day, before she was conducted
to his house, and before the marriage contract was signed, gave him a certain
number of aurei. I ask whether this donation is valid. I answered that strict
attention should not be paid to the time, that is, whether the donation was
made before she was conducted to his house, or before the marriage contract was
signed, as very frequently this is done after the marriage has been celebrated;
for unless the donation was made before the marriage was contracted, which is
understood to have been done by the consent of the parties, it will not be
valid.
(1) A girl was conducted to the country-seat of her intended husband three days
before the ceremony took place, remaining in a separate room from that of her
husband, and upon the day of the marriage before she passed under his control,
and before she was received under the rite of water and fire, that is to say,
before the nuptials were celebrated, he offered her ten aureias a gift. The
question arose that if a divorce took place after the marriage was solemnized,
whether the sum donated could be recovered. The answer was that what had been
donated as a gift before marriage could not be deducted from the dowry.

67. Labeo, Epitomes of Probabilities, by Paulus, Book II.
If a wife should purchase a slave with money given to her by her husband, or by
someone who is under his control, and after the slave becomes her property, she
should deliver him to her husband as a donation, the delivery will be valid,
even though this is done with the same intention with which other donations are
made, and no action for recovery can be granted her on this account.



TITLE II. CONCERNING DIVORCES AND REPUDIATIONS.

1. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXV.
Marriage is dissolved by divorce, death, captivity, or by any other kind of
servitude which may happen to be imposed upon either of the parties.

2. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XI.
The word divorce is derived either from diversity of opinion, or because those
who dissolve their marriage go different ways.
(1) In cases of repudiation, that is to say, in renunciation of marriage, the
following words are employed: "Retain your property" or "Retain the management
of your property."
(2) For the purpose of dissolving betrothals, it is certain that a renunciation
must be made, in which case the following words are used, namely: "I will not
accept your conditions."
(3) It makes no difference whether the renunciation takes place in the presence
or in the absence of the person under whose control one of the parties may be,
or of him who is under said control.

3. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXV.
It is not a true or actual divorce unless the purpose is to establish a
perpetual separation. Therefore, whatever is done or said in the heat of anger
is not valid, unless the determination becomes apparent by the parties
persevering in their intention, and hence where repudiation takes place in the
heat of anger and the wife returns in a short time, she is not held to have
been divorced.

4. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXVI.
Julianus asks in the Eighteenth Book of the Digest whether a woman who has
become insane can repudiate her husband, or be herself repudiated; and he says
that an insane woman can be repudiated, because she is in the position of a
person who has no knowledge of anything, but that she cannot repudiate her
husband on account of her madness, nor can her curator do so, but her father
can repudiate him. He would not have treated the question of repudiation unless
it had been established that the marriage would continue to exist even though
the woman was insane. This opinion seems to me to be correct.

5. The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXIV.
If a girl who has been emancipated should obtain a divorce in order that her
husband may profit by her dowry, and defraud her father who could claim it as
profectitious if she should die during marriage, relief should be granted the
father to prevent him from losing the dowry, for the Praetor must come to the
aid of the father just as much as to that of the husband. The right to claim
the dowry should therefore be granted to the father, just as if his daughter
had died during marriage.

6. Julianus, Digest, Book LXII.
The wives of those who are in the hands of the enemy can be considered to
always retain the place of married women, solely on the ground that others
cannot rashly marry them. And, generally speaking, it must be said that, so
long as it is certain that the husband is in captivity and is living, his wife
has not the right to form another matrimonial connection, unless she herself
has given some cause for repudiation. But if it is uncertain whether the
husband who is held by the enemy is living or dead, then, if the term of five
years has passed from the time when he was taken captive, his wife will have
the right to marry again, so that the first marriage will be held to have been
amicably dissolved, and each one of the parties will have their respective
rights annulled. The same rule must be observed where a husband remains at
home, and his wife is taken captive.1

7. Papinianus, On Adultery, Book I.
Where one party who has given the other notice of divorce repents, and the
other is ignorant of the change of mind, the marriage must be held to continue
to exist; unless the one who received the notice and is aware of the change of
mind, himself or herself desires to dissolve the marriage, for then it will be
dissolved by the one who received the notice.

8. The Same, On Adultery, Book II.
The Divine Hadrian exiled for the term of three years a man who, while on a
journey, took the wife of another man to his house, from which she sent to her
husband a notice of repudiation.

[1] At Civil Law, a man was presumed to be living until his death was
established, or such a long period had elapsed that, considering the ordinary
term of human life, the contrary presumption was raised that he could no longer
be in existence. This belonged to the disputable class of presumptions, and
followed the ordinary rule: "Stabitur praesumptioni donec probetur in
contrarium." The old Roman jurists are silent respecting the proper evidence to
be introduced, and the weight to be ascribed to any proof, in cases of this
kind. In more recent times, the age of the individual at the date of his
disappearance was ascertained, and if he had not been heard of for a sufficient
number of years to make him seventy-five at the time of the inquiry, he was
considered to be dead.
In both England and America the time is fixed at seven years. "Where a person
has not been heard of for many years, the presumption of the duration of life
ceases at the end of seven years." (Starkie, Law of Evidence, Vol. II, Page
457.) "After the lapse of seven years without intelligence concerning the
person, the presumption of life ceases, and the burden of proof is devolved on
the other party." (Greenleaf, Law of Evidence, I, IV.)
The limit to the presumption of life has not been definitely established in
Scotland; the best authorities place it from eighty to a hundred years.
(Dickson, The Law of Evidence in Scotland, I, VIII, 299.)
In nearly all countries, where circumstances have occurred which seem to prove
that the party in question could not reasonably have survived, as, for
instance, the loss of a ship, or departure on an unusually perilous journey,
the term may be shortened in the discretion of the court. --- ED.

9. Paulus, On Adultery, Book II.
No divorce is valid unless it takes place in the presence of seven Roman
citizens, who are of age, in addition to the freedman of the party who
institutes proceedings for that purpose. We understand the freedman to be one
who has been manumitted by the father, the grandfather, the great-grandfather,
and other ascendants interested in the proceedings above mentioned.1

[1] In the early ages of Rome, and even under the first emperors, divorce was a
very simple matter, being affected by mere repetition of the formulas mentioned
in the text. Marriage being considered nothing more than a civil contract
entered into by common consent, the very rational conclusion was arrived at
that it could, and should be dissolved with the same facility, when such a
step, in the opinion of either of the parties most interested, was deemed to be
advisable. The inevitable abuse of this privilege in the dissolute and corrupt
condition of Roman society ultimately caused the enactment of various laws
imposing severe penalties upon persons of both sexes who availed themselves of
it, whether by separation through agreement, or by the arbitrary repudiation of
one of the parties by the other, either for some frivolous cause, or for the
reason that he or she was an obstacle to the ambitious designs, or perverted
tastes which the presence or influence of the obnoxious spouse prevented from
being exercised with impunity.
Hence divorce did not require the intervention of a magistrate to establish its
validity, being a matter over which the parties themselves were held to have
undisputed control, subject of course, to the punishment prescribed for the
wilful violation of laws, which, as the result of the universal depravity, were
frequently not enforced.
Prior to the adoption of the Twelve Tables, the husband alone had the right to
divorce his wife; afterwards, the same privilege was conferred upon the latter.
The establishment of Christianity and the shrewd tactics of the priesthood in
proclaiming marriage to be a sacrament, and therefore a bond indissoluble by
human agency, has been the cause of untold suffering and injustice since the
adoption of this absurd and iniquitous principle.
The Canon Law only authorizes absolute divorce where impediments due to
consanguinity or affinity are notorious, and render marital union null from the
beginning; but the case must be heard, and judgment pronounced by officials of
the Church. "Si etiam parentela esset publica & notoria, absque iudicio
Ecclesias ab ea separari non potuit." (Corpus Juris Canonici, Decret, Greg.IV,
XIX, III.)
Among the Babylonians, every advantage was given to the husband; although if he
was to blame, and his wife had acted with propriety, she could take her dowry
and return to her parents.
"If the wife of a man who is living in his house, set her face to go out and
play the part of a fool, neglect her house, and belittle her husband, they
shall call her to account; if her husband say: 'I have put her away,' he shall
let her go. On her departure nothing shall be given to her for her divorce. If
her husband say: 'I have not put her away,' her husband may take another woman.
The first woman shall dwell in the house of her husband as a maid servant."
"If she have been a careful mistress and be without reproach, and her husband
have been going about and greatly belittling her, that woman has no blame. She
shall receive her dowry and shall go to her father's house." (The Code of
Hammurabi, Secs. 141, 142.)
The Mosiac law, in the matter of divorce, was fully as indulgent to the male
sex as that of any other primitive people, its application and enforcement
being entirely dependent upon the will of the husband. "When a man hath taken a
wife, and married her, and it comes to pass that she find no favour in his
eyes, because he hath found some uncleanness in her; then let him write her a
bill of divorcement, and give it in her hand, and send her out of his house."
(Deuteronomy, XXIV, 1.)
The right to the permanent separation of a married couple by common con-

10. Modestinus, Rides, Book I.
A freedwoman, who has married her patron, cannot separate from him without his
consent, unless she has been manumitted under the terms of a trust, for then
she can do so even though she is his freedwoman.

11. Ulpianus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book III.
Where the law says: "The right of a freedwoman, who is married to her patron,
to obtain a divorce shall not be allowed," this is not held to have made the
divorce ineffective, because marriage is ordinarily dissolved by the Civil Law;
therefore we cannot say that the marriage exists, as a separation has taken
place.

sent was recognized in Greece, and no restrictions were imposed upon the
parties afterwards. The advantage, as was the case elsewhere in antiquity,
remained with the husband, who, under the Athenian law, could divorce his wife
whenever he pleased. The latter was permitted to leave her husband if she had
good reasons for doing so, but she was compelled to file a petition for that
purpose setting forth the grounds of her complaint. If she was repudiated by
her husband, he was obliged to return her dowry, and if he neglected to do so,
suit could be brought against him, and alimony, payable monthly, collected by
her guardian for her support. (Potter, Antiquities of Greece, IV, XII.)
Mohammed said: "Every divorce is lawful excepting that of a boy or a lunatic,"
and this rule is carried to such an extent that repudiation, even if under
duress, or in a state of intoxication, will be valid. There are three kinds of
divorce according to Moslem jurists, which are all accomplished by the
repetition of certain prescribed formulas, the most approved of which, the
Talak Ahsan, that becomes instantly operative by the utterance of a single
sentence, being the most approved and popular. This species of divorce is
revocable within three months, but if a longer time than that elapses it
becomes final. In the other two kinds, after the third repetition of the
formula, the wife cannot be remarried to her husband, until she has been united
to another man and been divorced by him. Consummation of the second marriage is
indispensable.
A husband can divorce his wife at any time, even before cohabitation, and he
can delegate his power to do so to her by directing her to pronounce the
sentence that will put an end to the marital condition; which, however, will
only become operative when she immediately obeys without leaving the place, or
doing anything else. Her compliance is optional, and any change of position, or
even delay in pronouncing the decisive sentence of dissolution, is considered
as indicative of a refusal. (The Hedaya, IV, II, III.)
In ancient Russia, until the middle of the eighteenth century, divorce was
freely granted by the clergy upon the most trivial pretexts, alleged
incompatibility of temper alone being sufficient to affect a complete severance
of the nuptial tie. It was the custom among the Cossacks for a husband and wife
to appear before the assembly of the people and renounce one another; which,
when assented to, as it almost invariably was, constituted a legal separation,
by the common law of Russia. In recent times, however, matrimonial union is
considered indissoluble, a fact which indicates the increasing influence of the
Church. The common saying of the peasantry, "A bad pope may marry you, but a
good one cannot unmarry you," shows the general recognition of this principle.
(Kovalevsky, Modern Customs and Ancient Laws of Russia, Pages 42, 43.)
Divorce in Japan may take place by mutual consent and arrangement between the
parties, or by means of judicial proceedings. Bigamy, adultery by the wife,
cruelty, desertion, conviction of crime, and absence for three years, are the
chief reasons which may be alleged to effect a dissolution of marriage. Suit
cannot be

Again, Julianus says that a wife is not under such circumstances entitled to an
action to recover her dowry; hence it is reasonable that when her patron
desires her to remain his wife she cannot marry anyone else. For, as the
legislator understood that the marriage was, to a certain extent, dissolved by
the act of the freedwoman, he prevented her marriage with another, wherefore if
she should marry anyone else, she will be considered as not married.
Julianus, indeed, goes farther, for he thinks that such a woman cannot even
live in concubinage with anyone except her patron.

(1) The law says: "As long as the patron desires her to remain his wife." This
means that the patron wishes her to be his wife, and that his relationship
towards her should continue to exist; therefore

brought after one year has passed since the injured party ascertained that the
cause of action existed, or ten years subsequent to its occurrence. (Civil Code
of Japan, Arts. 808, 813, 816.)
In all countries subject to the supremacy of the Roman Catholic priesthood,
divorce, in the usual acceptation of the term, is not tolerated. The Spanish
Code provides for a suspension of all ordinary intercourse between husband and
wife. Adultery is the principal cause, and applies in every instance to the
woman, but only to her consort where it results in public scandal, or is so
notorious as to bring her into contempt. Cruelty, the exertion of force to
compel the wife to change her religion, attempts to prostitute members of his
family, and conviction of felony, furnish other grounds for instituting legal
proceedings. "El divorcio solo produce la suspenci२n de la vida com९n de los
casados." (C२digo Civil de
Espa०a, Art. 104.)
Adultery, cruelty, or conviction of a serious crime committed by either husband
or wife, is sufficient, in France, to enable the other to obtain a divorce
which carries with it the right to marry again, which the wife, as in the case
of a widow, however, cannot do before the expiration of three hundred days. If
it should be desired, a mere separation of persons and division of property may
be obtained. (Code Civil de France, Arts. 229, 230, 231, 232, 296, 306, 311.)
Similar regulations to those of Spain are in force in Italy. (Codice Civile del
Regno d'ltalia, Arts. 148, 158.)
An action for divorce to be valid must be brought in Switzerland within six
months after the injured consort becomes aware that good ground exists for it,
and, at all events within five years. The party against whom judgment is
rendered for adultery is forbidden to marry again in from one to three years,
in other instances, in from one to two years. (Schweizerisches Zivilgesetzbuch,
Arts.
137, 150.)
The causes of divorce in early times in England, according to an eminent
authority, were a former contract, duress, impotence, frigidity, affinity,
consanguinity, and impuberty: "Causa praecontractus, causa metus, causa
impotentiae, sen frigiditatis, causa affinitatis, causa consanguinitatis, causa
impubertatis." (Coke, II, Institutes, Pages 684, 685, 686, 687.)
The authority of the Church of Rome has, for centuries, so far as divorce is
concerned, been paramount in the English courts. The principles of the Canon
Law, founded upon the alleged Divine legislation of the Hebrews, and by which
an absolute separation of husband and wife could be effected only where some
cause invented by ecclesiastical ingenuity existed previous to marriage,
prevailed not merely while the ecclesiastical tribunals exercised exclusive
jurisdiction in cases of this kind, but even after cognizance of them had been
transferred to a secular court in 1857, by the Matrimonial Causes Act. (20, 25,
Vict.) Before that date, even the commission of adultery was not held to
justify the dissolving of a bond which was presumed to have received the
express sanction of the Almighty, through the agency of his inspired and
consecrated servants. There was no remedy for this unfortunate condition,
except by the passage of a private act of Parlia-
where he either ceases to be her patron, or to desire that she should remain
his wife, the authority of the law is at an end.
(2) It has been most justly established that the benefit of this law terminated
whenever the patron, by any indication of his will whatsoever, is understood to
have relinquished his desire to keep the woman as his wife. Hence, when he
institutes proceedings against his freedwoman on the ground of the removal of
property, after she had divorced him without his consent, our Emperor and his
Divine Father stated in
ment, a proceeding attended by so many legal complications, and necessitating
so much expense, as to place it beyond the reach of any except the most wealthy
and influential, many of whom were loath to avail themselves of its
questionable advantages.
The ancient canonical division of divorce into the two classes, a vinculo
matrimonii and a mensa et thoro, is still practically existent in England under
the names of absolute divorce and judicial separation, the only difference
being the greater latitude allowed the petitioner, and the fact that the
granting of the former is no longer limited to cases involving marriage within
the prohibited degrees of consanguinity or affinity.

By the Judicature Act of 1873, the Probate, Divorce, and Admiralty Division of
the High Court of Justice has now exclusive jurisdiction of divorce suits in
England. The husband can obtain a decree in his favor solely on the ground of
adultery; but the wife must establish not merely infidelity, but some other
crime, usually one of a sexual character, associated with it; such as bigamy,
rape, incest, sodomy, or desertion extending over a term of two years. Relief
will be refused in case of collusion or condonation, and to avoid, as far as
possible, any attempt at fraud or connivance, the judgment is invariably a
decree nisi, which may, on application for an order, be rendered absolute at
any time after six months have elapsed.
Where the wife is the plaintiff, even though she may have been convicted of
adultery, she is sometimes granted alimony when the custody of the children is
awarded to her, and she is without sufficient funds for their maintenance and
support.
In all actions for divorce, an appeal lies to the Court of Appeal, and from it
to the House of Lords within one week if the House is in session, otherwise,
within two weeks after it next convenes. (Wilson's Practice of the Supreme
Court of Judicature, Pages 10, 35, 72. Stephen, Commentaries of the Laws of
England, III, II, 3.)
The only causes for divorce recognized by the laws of Scotland are wilful
desertion and adultery. The first of these requires that intentional absence
for four years be proved to the satisfaction of the Commissarial or
Consistorial Court of Edinburgh, to which has been transferred the jurisdiction
of the ecclesiastical tribunal that formerly had the exclusive right to hear
such cases.
It was for ages the rule that where both parties had committed adultery,
neither was entitled to a decree; but this opinion no longer prevails, and
mutual guilt, so far from being an impediment, is rather considered as
affording an additional ground for a permanent separation. Under such
circumstances, however, neither consort can assert any claim to the property of
the other. Where one alone is to blame, all gifts or donations made in
consideration of marriage are forfeited to the other. (Erskine, Principles of
the Law of Scotland, I, VI, 23.)
The United States presents more anomalies, absurdities, and injustice in the
formulation and enforcement of its divorce laws than any other country on the
face of the globe. Entire want of statutory uniformity in any respect;
incessant conflicts of jurisdiction; an infinite variety of causes of action;
nullity in some States of decrees rendered in others; unrestricted freedom and
absolute prohibition of remarriage existing side by side in adjoining
commonwealths; extraordinary, and often incredible diversity in the judicial
interpretation of the most

a Rescript that the party was understood to be unwilling that the woman should
remain his wife, when he brings this action or another like it, which it is not
customary to do unless in case of divorce.
Wherefore, if the husband accuses her of adultery or of some other crime of
which no one can accuse a wife but her husband, the better opinion is that the
marriage is dissolved; for it should be remembered that the wife is not
deprived of the right to marry another except where the patron himself desires
to retain her in that capacity. Hence, whenever even a slight reason indicates
that the husband does not de-

obvious legal propositions; a contemptuous disregard of the principles of
equity when the interest of the alleged weaker sex happens to appeal to the
sympathies or arouse the prejudices of the court; the frequent exclusion or
neglect of important evidence; have made divorce legislation and its judicial
execution in this country a reproach to every citizen who believes in fair
play; and have excited the amazement of intelligent foreigners who, accustomed
to the impartial administration of justice, are unable to understand how such a
condition of affairs can
prevail.

As the Common Law was formally adopted by the revolting Colonies during the
Revolution, and in England only the ecclesiastical courts had jurisdiction over
suits for divorce, legal separation of husband and wife was impossible until
provision was made for it by legislation in the several States. Under such
circumstances it is not remarkable that innumerable discrepancies and
incongruities
exist.
The Constitution of the United States says: "Full faith and credit shall be
given in each State to the public acts, records, and judicial proceedings of
every other State." (Art. IV, Sec. 1.) This rule has been held by the Supreme
Court not to be of universal application in divorce cases; as, while every
State is expected to uphold the validity of a decree properly obtained within
its own borders, it is not required to accept as legal one secured elsewhere.
It is a frequent occurrence for New York judges to ignore decrees based upon
perfectly competent and conclusive evidence which have been rendered in Nevada
and the Dakotas. This anomalous conflict of authority relative to the question
of jurisdiction is one of the curiosities of American jurisprudence.
The most recent statistics, compiled by the Bureau of the Census of the
Department of Commerce, which include returns from all but ninety-three
counties in the United States, establish the deplorable fact that one out of
every nine marriages is dissolved by divorce. The extraordinary increase in the
rate in twenty-six years becomes apparent when it is stated that in 1890 fifty-
three divorces to every hundred thousand people, were granted, and in 1915, the
ratio was one hundred and twelve to every hundred thousand. It must be borne in
mind that the numerous members of the Catholic communion of the country are
necessarily excluded from this estimate, as their Church does not permit
divorce; hence the proportion must actually be much larger. The lowest rate,
thirteen, was found in New York, the highest, six hundred and seven in Nevada,
where the divorce industry is encouraged as the source of a profitable revenue.
South Carolina forbids absolute divorce; in Washington the greatest latitude is
conceded to the courts, whose decisions are, in fact, largely dependent upon
their discretion. In some commonwealths of the Union the judge, sitting as
chancellor, has final jurisdiction, and the position of a party against whom a
decision contrary to the law or the evidence has been rendered is hopeless, as
there is no appeal. The opportunity thus afforded an unscrupulous magistrate to
gratify his personal animosity by an act of oppression not susceptible of
revision is sometimes too tempting to be resisted, and finds expression in the
infliction of flagrant injustice and injury.
Near degrees of consanguinity do not always constitute a bar to matrimony, and
hence provide ground for annulment; as in many parts of the Union the mar-
sire her to remain his wife, it must be said that the freedwoman has already
acquired the right to contract marriage with another. Therefore, if the patron
has betrothed himself to, or destined himself for some other woman, or has
sought marriage with another, he must be considered to no longer desire the
freedwoman to be his wife.
The same rule will apply where he keeps the woman as his concubine.
riage of first cousins is legal, and it has not been much more than a
generation since, in certain States, the marriage of uncle and niece was not
considered incestuous.
As a rule, divorce proceedings may be instituted in any county court, but there
are States in which they must be brought before the highest and most august of
their tribunals.
The indiscriminate partiality shown to women in suits of this kind is
notorious, and is confirmed by the fact that more than sixty-six and two-thirds
per cent of the divorces granted in this country are in favor of the wife,
regardless of whether she was the plaintiff or not. This well-recognized bias
of the courts in favor of distressed females has had the effect of creating a
class of adventuresses popularly known as "alimony widows," who travel from
place to place, marry one husband after another for the sake of the money which
can be extorted from them, with the aid of lawyers, if possible, more rapacious
and disreputable than themselves. Even when a good cause of action exists, the
husband is not infrequently the victim of gross injustice. In addition to
excessive alimony, he is compelled to pay enormous counsel fees; he may be
enjoined from disposing of his property, thereby preventing him from meeting
his necessary expenses; and out of the funds which he himself furnishes, spies
are hired to dog his footsteps wherever he goes.
There are few abuses of judicial authority so glaring and reprehensible as
those countenanced by many of the divorce courts of the United States. It is
difficult to suggest a remedy, but the proper one is obviously not the flimsy
expedient advocated by certain religious fanatics of enacting a federal statute
by which divorce will be absolutely prohibited, thus indissolubly uniting
persons unfitted for intimate association, and perpetuating a widespread
condition of marital unhappiness which, judging from the ever-increasing number
of divorces --- without taking into consideration the manifold instances of
cruelty and distress that are never disclosed --- bids fair to ere long become
universal. --- ED.




TITLE III.
IN WHAT WAY THE DOWRY CAN BE RECOVERED AFTER THE MARRIAGE HAS BEEN DISSOLVED.

1. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XV.
The cause of the dowry always and everywhere takes precedence, for it is to the
public interest for dowries to be preserved to wives, as it is absolutely
necessary that women should be endowed for the procreation of progeny, and to
furnish the state with freeborn citizens.
2. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXV.
Where marriage is dissolved, the dowry should be delivered to the woman. The
husband is not compelled, in the beginning, to promise it by stipulation to
another, unless this will not in any way prejudice his rights; for it must be
held that if he has reason to apprehend anything that may inconvenience
himself, he should not be compelled to promise the dowry to anyone else but his
wife. This is the case where the woman is her own mistress.
(1) But if she is under the control of her father, and the dowry comes from
him, it belongs to him and to his daughter. Hence the father cannot, either in
his own proper person or by an agent, claim the dowry without the consent of
his daughter; and therefore Sabinus says that it should be promised in this
manner. Hence, it ought to be promised to whomever both parties direct this to
be done.
6. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
Again, if the father alone orders this, the right to bring suit for the dowry
will not be taken away from his daughter after she becomes her own mistress.
Moreover, if the father alone makes a promise with the consent of his daughter,
the right of action will remain unimpaired so far as he is concerned. But can
he act alone, or can he institute proceedings conjointly with his daughter? I
think that the right of action to which the father, conjointly with his
daughter, is entitled, is not lost; but if the daughter becomes her own
mistress, this stipulation will prejudice him.
(2) When the father brings an action on dowry should we understand the consent
of the daughter to mean that she expressly consents, or that she does not offer
any opposition? It is stated in a Rescript of the Emperor Antoninus that a
daughter is held to give her consent to her father where she does not clearly
manifest opposition.
Julianus states in the Forty-eighth Book of the Digest that a father is
considered to institute proceedings with the consent of his daughter, when the
latter is insane; for where she cannot manifest opposition on account of
insanity, he thinks very reasonably that she gives her consent. But where the
daughter is absent, it must be said that her father does not act with her
consent, and he must furnish security that she will ratify what he does. Where
the daughter is in possession of her senses, we require her to have knowledge
of the proceedings, in order that it may appear that she does not oppose them.
3. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
The consent of both father and daughter is required, not only in demanding the
dowry, but also in the payment of it, as both have a common interest in the
same, and neither of them can make the condition of the other worse. Where,
however, the money which the daughter received comes into the hands of the
father, both are deprived of the right of action on dowry.
4. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XV.
Where a father collects a dowry from the husband of the daughter without her
consent, and gives it to her second husband in her name, and the father, having
died, the daughter brings an action against her first husband, she will be
barred by an exception on the ground of fraud.

5. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXX.
With reference to the division of the dowry during the year in which the
divorce took place, the question arises whether the time shall be computed from
the day of marriage or from that on which the property was delivered to the
husband. Therefore, where the profits are to be retained by the husband,
neither the day when the dowry was constituted nor the day of the marriage
should be taken into consideration, but that on which the land given by way of
dowry was first delivered, that is to say when possession was given.

6. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
If the land was delivered before marriage, the year must be reckoned from the
day of the marriage to the same day of the following year. This rule must be
observed for all other years until the divorce takes place, for where the land
has been delivered before the marriage, and the crops have been gathered from
the same when a divorce takes place, these must be returned as forming part of
the dowry.

7. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXI.
It is held that the profits are what remains after deducting the expenses, and
Scaevola applies this to those incurred by both husband and wife. For if the
wife gave her dowry the day before the vintage, and, after the vintage was
removed by the husband, he obtains a divorce, Scaevola does not think that the
profits only of the eleven months should be refunded, but that also the
expenses which were incurred should be deducted before dividing the profits.
Therefore, if the husband spends
anything for this year, the expenses of both parties should be considered.
Thus, if an account is taken of the expenses incurred by the woman during
several years of marriage, it will be necessary to compute them from the first
year, before the land was given by way of
dowry.
(1) Papinianus, however, says in the Eleventh Book of Questions that where a
divorce takes place, the profits should be divided, not from the day when the
property was leased, but that an account should be taken of the preceding time
during which the marriage existed. For if the land was given as dowry at the
time of the vintage, and the husband leased it to be held from the Kalends of
November, and the divorce took place on the last day of the month of January,
it is not just for him to be able to retain at the same time the profits of the
vintage and the fourth part of the rent for the year when the divorce took
place; otherwise, if the divorce was obtained upon the day before the vintage,
the husband would retain the entire profits. Hence, if the divorce took place
at the end of the month of January, and the marriage had existed for four
months, the profits of the vintage and the fourth part of the rent for the
present year should be consolidated, and out of this money a third part should
be paid to the husband.
(2) The same rule must also be observed in the opposite case. For if a woman,
immediately after the vintage has been gathered, gives a tract of land by way
of dowry to her husband, and the latter rents the same land from the Kalends of
March, and the divorce takes place on the Kalends of April, the husband can
retain not only the twelfth part of the rent, but also a proportionate amount
of the rent which will be due for the entire number of months during which the
land was held as
dowry.
(3) Moreover, if the crops during the year when the divorce was obtained
belonged to the tenant in compliance with the terms of the lease, and the
marriage is dissolved before the vintage, the money derived from the crops must
be computed with reference to the expected yield of the next vintage.
(4) It is therefore apparent, from what has been stated, that those profits
which the woman collected before she was married should not be included in the
division.
(5) Set-offs can be made on account of donations, as well as because of what
may have been appropriated out of such profits as have been collected after the
divorce.
(6) What has been mentioned with reference to a year also applies to the term
of six months, where two crops are gathered annually, as is the case where land
is irrigated.
(7) The same rule applies where profits are collected only once in several
years, as where trees are cut down.
(8) Moreover, if the lease of land is of such a character that something in
addition to the annual rent must be paid at the end of five years, we must take
into account the amount of the excess in proportion to the part of the five
years which has elapsed.
(9) We hold that the same principle applies not only to land but also to
cattle, so that the wool of sheep and the increase of flocks must be delivered.
For if the husband accepts, by way of dowry, certain ewes about to have young,
or which are soon to be sheared, will he be obliged to return nothing if a
divorce should take place immediately after the lambs have been born, or the
sheep sheared? In this instance, we must take into account the profits for the
entire time during which the animals were taken care of, and not merely that
when they were collected.
(10) With reference to a slave, the entire year must be taken into account if
his services have been leased for that term, so that they will belong to the
husband for the time previous to the divorce, but after it to the wife.
(11) The same rule also applies to the rents of urban estates as to the crops
of farm lands.
(12) Where a wife gives land to her husband by way of dowry, and he cuts down
the trees, if these are understood to be profits, their value in proportion to
that part of the year which has elapsed must be refunded. I think, however,
that if the trees which were cut down formed a thicket, or were small, they
must be classed as crops. Where, however, they were not of this description,
the husband should be held liable as having caused a deterioration of the land.
But if the trees have been overthrown by the force of a storm, it must be said
that their value should be paid to the woman, and that they should not be
classed as crops, any more than when a treasure is found it is not reckoned as
part of the crop, but half of it should be restored to the wife, just as in the
case where a treasure is found on the land of another.
(13) If a husband should find marble quarries upon the land of his wife given
by way of dowry, and they render the land more profitable, the marble which has
been taken out, but not removed, will belong to the husband, but the expenses
he has incurred shall not be made good to him, because the marble is not part
of the yield of the land, unless it is of such a character that the stone is
renewed, as is the case in certain quarries in Gaul and Asia.
(14) The yield of chalk pits, however, as well as of mines of gold or silver or
any other kind of metal, or of sand pits, is considered to be part of the
produce of the land.
(15) Security is sometimes given to the husband by his wife for the profits,
and he retains nothing, if the woman receives the land while the crops are
still standing. Sometimes the husband keeps the crops and restores nothing,
which occurs where there is no more than he has a right to retain as his share.
Sometimes, indeed, he must return the crops, when he has collected more than he
is entitled to retain.
The same rule applies where proceedings are instituted with reference to the
dowry against a father-in-law, or against the heir of either of the joint-
owners of the property.
(16) Pomponius says that whatever has been expended in the cultivation and the
planting of the ground is to be considered as expended for the gathering of the
crops, as well as whatever has been laid out for the preservation of buildings,
or in caring for a sick slave; that is to say, where any profits are obtained
from the said building or slave. These expenses, however, cannot be claimed
where the husband retains the entire profit for the year, because the expenses
should in the first place be provided for out of the income.
It is evident that where the husband built a new house which was necessary, or
rebuilt the old one which had entirely fallen into ruin without his fault, he
will be entitled to present a bill for the expense. In like manner, if he uses
a hoe upon the land, the same rule will apply; for such expenses are either
necessary or beneficial to the property, and give rise to an action in favor of
the husband.

8. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
Where a tract of land is given by way of dowry, and stone is taken therefrom,
it is settled that the profit of the quarries will belong to the husband;
because it is clear that the woman gave the said tract of land with the
intention that the profit of the same should belong to him, unless she stated
the contrary in the bestowal of the dowry.
(1) Whatever is expended in the sowing of grain can be deducted from the
vintage, in case of the failure of the crop; because the yield of the entire
year is considered to be the same.

9. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XIV.
If a woman should be in default in receiving her dowry, her husband shall only
be responsible for bad faith, and not for negligence with reference to the
matter, in order to avoid his being compelled by the act of his wife to
cultivate her land indefinitely; but the crops which have come into the hands
of the husband must be given up.

10. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XV.
Where a married daughter who was captured by the enemy, and who had a dowry
obtained from her father, died in captivity, I think it should be held that the
same principle applies as if she had died during marriage; so that, even if she
was not under the control of her father, the dowry will revert to him from whom
it had been derived.
(1) Proculus says that where a man kills his wife, an action on dowry should be
granted to her heir; and this is perfectly proper, for it is not just that a
husband should expect to make a profit out of the dowry as the result of his
own crime. The same rule should be observed in the opposite case.

11. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XVI.
If a woman should knowingly give as dowry property which belongs to another, it
must be delivered to her husband, just as if she had given him something that
was her own, as well as the crops for the proportionate part of the year during
which the divorce took place.

12. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXVI.
It is established that the husband can have judgment rendered against him for
the amount which he is able to pay, but this privilege cannot be granted to his
heir;

13. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
Because a privilege of this kind is a personal one, and is extinguished by the
death of the party directly interested.

14. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXVI.
The case is different where a defender appears, for it is held that he properly
defends the husband if he merely gives to the wife the amount which she could
have recovered if she had brought suit against her husband himself.
(1) Pomponius very properly asks, in the Sixteenth Book On Sabinus, where a
husband had made an agreement with his wife that judgment should not be
rendered against him to the extent of his resources, but for the entire amount;
whether such an agreement should be observed. He denies that it should be
observed. This opinion seems to me to be correct, for it is better to hold that
such an agreement was made contrary to good morals, as it is apparent that it
was entered into in violation of the respect which a woman should show to her
husband.

15. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
In order to determine the amount of the pecuniary resources of the husband,
consideration must be paid to the time when the case was decided.
(1) Although the heir of the husband may have judgment rendered against him for
the entire amount of the dowry, he will still be entitled to any set-off having
reference to pecuniary obligations of the wife, in order to reduce his
liability; as, for instance, where donations have been made by the husband of
property appropriated by his wife, or expenses incurred, but he will not have
the right to punish her for bad behavior.
(2) The same privilege will be enjoyed by the father-in-law; that is to say, he
may have judgment rendered against him to the extent of his resources, when his
daughter-in-law brings an action of dowry against him;

16. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XVI.
For the reason that a father-in-law occupies the place of a parent.

17. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
On the other hand, if a father-in-law is sued by the husband on his promise,
the question may be asked whether he will be entitled to this same privilege.
Neratius and Proculus state in the Book of Parchments that this is just.
(1) Moreover, where the wife is sued on her promise, the better opinion is that
she can protect herself by an exception. Proculus also says the same thing;
just as is the case where an exception is granted her when she belongs to a
partnership, although she is liable under the
Civil Law.
(2) Neratius and Sabinus hold that where, in an action on dowry, a judge,
through ignorance of the law, renders a decision against a husband for the
entire amount, he can make use of an exception on the ground of fraud, and that
he will be protected by it.

18. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XVI.
Labeo says that the children of a woman who are the heirs of their father also
can have judgment rendered against them only to the extent of their resources.
(1) Although in matters relating to the dowry, a husband is not only liable for
fraud but also for negligence; still, when, in an action on dowry inquiry is
made as to his pecuniary responsibility, fraud is only taken into
consideration, because in the management of his own affairs he is not liable
for negligence. I think that, although fraud can only affect him if he is not
solvent, this merely applies to his inability to pay the amount due to his
wife, and not to the fraud of which he may have been guilty toward anyone else.
Ofilius, however, says that if the dotal property should be lost through the
bad faith of the husband, and he is in other respects insolvent, even though he
has not committed fraud to render himself insolvent, still, judgment should be
rendered against him solely for the amount of the dotal property with respect
to which he has acted fraudulently; just as if it was by bad faith that he had
rendered himself pecuniarily responsible. If, however, the husband was not
guilty of either fraud or negligence with reference to the loss of the dotal
property, only those rights of action to which the husband would be entitled on
this ground should be assigned to his wife; as, for instance, those for theft,
or unlawful damage.

19. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXVI.
But if a woman obtains a divorce, and issue is joined in an action on dowry,
and she returns to her husband, the marriage having been re-established, the
action will be terminated, and everything will remain in its former condition.

20. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book VII.
Although a woman may have received her dowry during marriage not for the
purpose of paying her debts, or buying certain desirable lands, but in order
that she might assist her children by a former husband, or her brothers, or her
parents, or ransom them from the hands of the enemy, for the reason that these
objects are just and honorable, the dowry will not be held to have been
improperly received, and therefore, in accordance with justice, it was rightly
paid to her.
This rule also must be observed with reference to a daughter under paternal
control.

21. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book III.
Where a husband has expended money belonging to the dowry for the purpose of
ransoming from robbers any slaves necessary for the service of his wife, or in
order that the woman may release from imprisonment one of her necessary slaves,
he will be liable for what has been expended; and if only a portion of the
dowry has been used, he will be liable for that portion, but if all of it has
been consumed, the action on dowry will be extinguished.
This rule applies with much more force where a father-in-law brings an action
on dowry, for an action must be rendered for what has been expended for his
benefit, whether the husband himself has done this, or whether he gave the
money to the daughter in order that she might do it. If, however, the father
should not institute proceedings, but, after his death, his daughter alone
brings an action to recover her dowry, it must be held that the same rule will
apply; for since an exception on the ground of fraud is included in an action
on dowry, as in other bona fide actions; for it may be said (as is also held by
Celsus) that this expense is included in an action on dowry, especially if it
was incurred with the consent of the daughter.

22. The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXIII.
Where a father gives the dowry, or a stranger who does so contracts for it
subject to a certain contingency, as for instance, if a divorce or death should
take place, it must be said that the woman will, in any event be entitled to
the action which was not mentioned in the agreement.
(1) If, after the marriage has been dissolved, the wife, being under paternal
control, uses up the dowry jointly belonging to herself and her father without
the consent of the latter, the father will be entitled to an action to obtain
the delivery of the dowry to himself, whether his daughter be living or dead.
This rule also applies where the dowry is given to a woman who is likely to
waste it. If, however, it was given for good reasons to one who will not be
likely to squander it, no action will lie, and after the death of the father,
neither his heirs nor the woman can institute proceedings to recover it.
(2) If, after the marriage has been dissolved, the woman, having been deceived,
accepts by novation a debtor who is insolvent, she will, nevertheless, be
entitled to an action on dowry.
(3) Where a father, during the absence of his daughter, institutes proceedings
to recover the dowry, even though he fails to give security for the
ratification of his act, the right to sue should be denied the daughter,
whether she becomes her father's heir, or whether she receives from him, by way
of legacy, an amount equal to her dowry. Therefore, Julianus stated in several
places, that what was given her
by her father should be set off against her dowry, and that it would be to her
profit if she received as much from him as was due from her husband as dowry,
and which he had paid her father.
(4) If the father should not be permitted to remain at Rome, where the suit is
brought for the dowry, on account of some sentence imposed upon him, the amount
of the dowry must be paid to the daughter, provided she furnishes security that
her father will ratify her act.
(5) It is necessary for the daughter to give her consent to her father bringing
the action, at the time when issue was joined. In accordance with this, if she
says that she consents, and, before issue is joined she should change her mind,
or even be emancipated, the action brought by her father will be of no effect.
(6) We also agree with Labeo that sometimes an action should be refused the
father, if his character is so degraded that it is to be feared that he will
squander the dowry after receiving it; therefore the authority of the judge
should be interposed, as far as he can do so, to protect the best interests of
both daughter and father. If, however, the daughter conceals herself in order
to avoid giving her consent to a father of this kind, I certainly think that an
action should be granted the father, but only after proper cause has been
shown. For what if the daughter, through motives of filial reverence, should
agree with her father to be absent, why should we not hold that an action
should not be granted him? But if the father is such a person that his daughter
ought by all means to give her consent, that is to say, is a man of an
excellent reputation, and his daughter is a woman of fickle character, or very
young, or too much under the influence of an undeserving husband; it must be
said that the Praetor should rather favor the father and grant him an action.
(7) Where either a husband or a wife becomes insane during marriage, let us
consider what should be done. And, in the first place it should be observed
that there is no doubt whatever that the one who is attacked by insanity cannot
send notice of repudiation to the other, for the reason that he or she is not
in possession of their senses. It must, however, be considered whether the
woman should be repudiated under such circumstances. If, indeed, the insanity
has lucid intervals, or if the affliction is perpetual but still endurable by
those associated with the woman, then the marriage ought by no means to be
dissolved. And where the party who is aware of this fact, and of sound mind,
gives
notice of repudiation to the other who is insane, he will, as we have stated,
be to blame for the dissolution of the marriage; for what is so benevolent as
for the husband or the wife to share in the accidental misfortunes of the
other?
If, however, the insanity is so violent, ferocious, and dangerous that no hope
of recovery exists, and it causes terror to the attendants; then, if the other
party desires to annul the marriage either on account of cruelty which
accompanies the insanity, or because he has no children and is tempted by the
desire of having offspring, the said party, being of sound mind, will be
permitted to notify the other, who is in-
sane, of repudiation; so that the marriage may be dissolved without reproach
attaching to either, and neither party will suffer any damage.
(8) Where, however, the woman is affected with the most violent form of
insanity, and the husband, through crafty motives, is unwilling to annul the
marriage, but treats the unfortunate condition of his wife with scorn, and
shows no sympathy for her, and it is perfectly evident that he does not give
her proper care, and makes a wrongful use of her dowry; then, either the
curator of the insane woman or her relatives have the right to go into court in
order to require the husband to support her, furnish her with provisions,
provide her with medicine, and omit nothing which a husband should do for his
wife, according to the amount of the dowry which he received.
If, however, it is evident that he is about to squander the dowry, and not
enjoy it as a man ought to do, then the dowry shall be sequestered, and enough
taken out of it for the maintenance of the wife and her slaves, and all dotal
agreements made between the parties at the time of the marriage shall remain in
their former condition, and be dependent upon the recovery of the wife, or the
death of either of the parties.
(9) Moreover, the father of the woman who has become insane can legally begin
an action for the restoration of the dowry to himself, or to his daughter; for
although she, being insane, cannot give notice of repudiation, it is certain
that her father can do so.
(10) If after the marriage has been dissolved, the father should become insane,
his curator can bring suit to recover the dowry with the consent of his
daughter; or, where there is no curator, his daughter will be allowed to bring
it, but she must give security for the ratification of her act.
(11) It must also be held that, where the father is taken captive by the enemy,
an action to recover the dowry should be granted to the daughter.
(12) Let us now pass to another subject, and inquire against whom the action on
dowry will lie. It is clear that it will lie against the husband himself,
whether the dowry was given to him, or to another with his consent, whether the
latter was subject to his control or not. Where, however, the husband is
subject to paternal authority, and the dowry is given to his father-in-law,
then suit must be brought against the father-in-law. It is evident that if it
was given to the son, or has been given by the direction of his father-in-law,
the latter will still be absolutely liable. But if it is given to the son, but
not by the direction of the father, Sabinus and Cassius gave it as their
opinion that an action could, nevertheless, be brought against the father,
because the dowry is held to have come into the hands of him who has the
peculium. It will, however, be sufficient for judgment to be rendered against
him for the amount of the peculium, or to the extent to which the property of
the father has been benefited.
If, however, the dowry has been given to the father-in-law, he cannot institute
proceedings against the husband unless the latter becomes the heir of the
father.
(13) When a woman makes a mistake as to the condition of her husband, and
thinks that he is a freeman while, in fact, he is a slave, some preference must
be shown her with respect to the property of her husband; for example, if there
are other creditors, she must be preferred in case an action de peculio is
brought, and if the slave owes anything to his master, the woman shall not be
preferred to him, except with reference to what was either given by way of
dowry, or purchased with money forming part of it, since property of this kind
is dotal.

23. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXVI.
And where anything has been expended on property belonging to the dowry, and no
account is given of the same by the woman, an exception on the ground of bad
faith will be available.

24. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIII.
If, during the existence of the marriage, the wife desires to institute
proceedings on account of the impending insolvency of her husband, what time
must we fix for her to claim the dowry? It is settled that it can be demanded
from the time when it is perfectly apparent that the pecuniary resources of the
husband are not sufficient for the delivery of the dowry.
(1) If the wife should institute proceedings after her husband has been
disinherited, the better opinion is that the demand for the dowry should begin
to date from the time that the heir entered upon the estate of the father of
her husband.
(2) Whenever security should be given to a wife for the payment of her dowry,
after a certain date, if her husband cannot furnish security, then the
advantage arising from the enjoyment of the dowry during the intermediate time
having been deducted, judgment should be rendered against him for the
remainder. If, however, the husband should refuse to give security when he is
able to do so; Mela says judgment should be rendered against him for the entire
amount, and no account should be taken of any deduction growing out of the
benefit obtained during the intermediate time.
It is, therefore, a part of the duty of the judge to release the husband if
security is furnished, or to render judgment against him, after having taken
the set-off into consideration. This, indeed, is the practice at present, nor
is a woman permitted to say that she prefers to suffer delay rather than submit
to a reduction in the amount to be paid.
(3) Whether the dowry is at the risk of the husband or the wife, the husband
must, nevertheless, pay it within the time established by law.
(4) Where a husband, with the consent of his wife, manumits slaves forming a
part of the dowry, even if his wife intended to donate the slaves to him, he
will not be liable for the expenses incurred in giving them their freedom; but
if this was a business transaction carried on between them, he will be
compelled by the court to give security to restore to his wife anything which
comes into his hands from the property or the obligations of the freedmen.
(5) If the husband should be cruel to the dotal slaves, let us see whether an
action can be brought against him on this account. And, in fact, if he is only
cruel to the slaves of his wife, it is settled that he will be liable on this
account; but if he is by nature cruel to his own slaves, it must be said that
his immoderate severity should be checked by an order of court; for although a
wife cannot require from her husband greater diligence than he employs in his
own affairs, still, such cruelty as is reprehensible when exhibited with
reference to his own property must be restrained with reference to that of
others, that is to say, with respect to the slaves composing the dowry.
(6) Where a wife lends property belonging to her husband, and it is lost, it
should be considered whether she must permit this to be set off against her
dowry; and I think that if her husband forbade her to lend it, the deduction
should at once be made; but if he did not permit her to do so, the judge can
grant her a reasonable time to return it, if she gives security.
(7) When a portion of the property of a wife should be confiscated, she will
have a right of action to recover the remainder of her dowry. I also hold that
if a portion of the dowry has been confiscated alter issue has been joined, it
will be sufficient for the judge to issue an order compelling the husband to
restore the remainder. If, however, the entire dowry has been confiscated, the
right of action will be extinguished.

25. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXVI.
Where a dowry is given to a son under paternal control without the order of his
father, an action de peculio will lie; but where expenses have been incurred by
the son, or an account of property given by him, or because of articles
belonging to the peculium having been appropriated by the wife, the peculium is
increased; as the father acquires a right of action derived from the person of
his son, and hence everything included in the peculium must be given to the
wife, if there still remains anything due to her.
(1) The husband, when restoring the dowry, must furnish security against fraud
and negligence. If he has acted fraudulently to avoid making restitution,
judgment shall be rendered against him for the amount which the woman swears to
in court, because no one should retain property belonging to us against our
consent.
(2) If the dotal property becomes deteriorated after a divorce, and the husband
is in default in returning the dowry, he shall, under all circumstances, be
liable for the depreciation in value.
(3) Where slaves that constitute part of the dowry take to flight, the husband
must give security to pursue them, as a good citizen should do, and to restore
them.
(4) Where a husband rents a tract of dotal land for five years, and after the
first year a divorce takes place; Sabinus says that he is not obliged to return
the land to his wife, unless she gives security to indemnify her husband if
judgment should be rendered against him for anything that occurs after the
first year of the lease; and he must give
security to his wife to pay to her everything which he obtained under the
lease, except the rent of the first year.

26. The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXVII.
Where the husband has once been in default, and his wife refuses to accept a
dotal slave after he has been tendered by him, and the slave afterwards dies;
neither the husband nor his heir will be liable for the value of said slave,
nor will he be liable for damages, because his wife refused to accept the slave
after her husband had tendered him.

27. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XL
If the wife should die after a divorce, and her heir should bring an action for
the dowry against her husband, or his father, it is held that the same rules
will apply with reference to the restoration of the dowry, as are ordinarily
applicable where the woman herself institutes proceedings.

28. Ulpianus, Institutes, Book I.
It is held that the husband can also act when he has a right to recover
anything from his wife; for instance, if he has lost money on her account
either because he has expended it for her, or paid it out under her direction.
But if he has not lost anything thus far, for example, where he is
conditionally liable, he is not yet considered qualified to proceed.

29. The Same, Disputations, Book III.
Whenever a father gives a dowry and stipulates for its return, he does not
transfer the right of action for the dowry to her person unless it was agreed
that this shall be continuous. But if he intended to stipulate for the
intervening time, he cannot do so without the consent of his daughter, even
though she may be under his control; because he cannot make the condition of
the dowry worse unless she consents. It is clear that if he gave the dowry
before marriage, he can stipulate with reference to the interval, even before
marriage, and without the consent of his daughter.
(1) Where anyone gives a dowry in behalf of a woman, and agrees that it shall
be paid to him when the marriage is dissolved, no matter in what way this is
done, and the husband afterwards pays the wife her dowry, it is most justly
held that an action for the recovery of the dowry will, nevertheless, lie
against the husband in favor of the party who gave it.

30. Julianus, Digest, Book XVI.
A woman who is married a second time is not prevented from instituting
proceedings against her first husband for the recovery of her dowry.
(1) Whenever, through the fault of the husband, it happens that the dowry is
not demanded from the father-in-law, or from anyone else who promised it in
behalf of the wife; or where the daughter died dur-
ing marriage, or where, having become the mother of a family, she appointed as
heir the party who promised the dowry for her; it is well settled that the
husband is not liable for anything more than to release them from the
obligation.

31. The Same, Digest, Book XVIII.
If the husband has been convicted of a criminal offence, and a part of his
property is confiscated, the Treasury must pay his creditors, among whom his
wife is included.
(1) Where a father, having promised two hundred aurei to his daughter as a
dowry, agreed that no more than a hundred should be demanded of her, and the
marriage having been dissolved, he brings suit for the hundred aurei,
concerning which the agreement was made that they should not be claimed, they
are not understood to form part of the dowry. Where, however, after the death
of the father, the husband brings an action against his heir, this sum will
also be included in the dowry.
(2) If an agent appointed by the father should bring an action for the dowry
with the consent of the daughter, and the father should die after a judgment
has been obtained, the right of action to enforce the judgment will vest to the
daughter rather than in the heirs of the father.
(3) Where the dowry has been given to the father, and one of the sons of the
latter has been appointed heir to a certain portion of his estate under a
condition, and while the condition is pending his co-heirs pay the dowry to the
woman in proportion to their respective shares, the said son will be released
from liability for payment of his part of the dowry, as he will not be entitled
to an action against his co-heirs for the recovery of his share of the money.
(4) Where a woman receives a tract of land as her dowry, but no account of the
crops have been taken in proportion to the time during the year when she was
not married, she can, nevertheless, bring the action, because she received by
way of dowry less than she was entitled to, for this has reference to an
increase of dowry; just as if she had not received the offspring of slaves, or
any legacies or inheritances, which had been acquired by her husband through
dotal slaves after a divorce had taken place.

32. The Same, On Urseius Ferox, Book II.
If a former husband, as a debtor of his wife, should promise the delivery of
the dotal property to her second husband by way of dowry, the amount of the
dowry will not be any more than the pecuniary resources of the first husband
will justify.

33. Africanus, Questions, Book VII.
A woman promised a certain sum of money by way of dowry, and produced parties
who stipulated that a portion of it should be paid to them, in case the
marriage was dissolved. The woman died before any dowry had been given, after
appointing her husband her heir, and he
entered upon her estate, which proved to be unprofitable. He will,
nevertheless, be liable to the parties with whom the stipulation was made, as,
by entering upon the estate of the woman who was his debtor he is understood to
have repaid himself; and it makes no difference, so far as he is concerned,
that the estate was insolvent, since he is liable to the other creditors.

34. The Same, Questions, Book VIII.
Titia obtained a divorce from Seius. Titius stated that she was under his
control, and demanded that the dowry should be delivered to him, while she
asserted that she was her own mistress, and wished to bring an action for the
recovery of the dowry. The question arose what course the judge ought to take.
I answered that he should refuse an action to the father, unless he could prove
that his daughter was not only under his control, but had also given her
consent to the suit, just as he should be refused even though he was able to
prove that his daughter was under his control.

35. Marcianus, Institutes, Book X.
A freedwoman, who is divorced from her patron with his consent, can bring an
action against him for the recovery of the dowry which she gave him.

36. Paulus, On Adultery, Book II.
Where the husband is not pecuniarily able to pay the dowry and it is
confiscated, judgment should be rendered against him in favor of the Treasury
for the amount which he is able to pay, in order that the woman may not be
punished to the injury of the husband.

37. Ulpianus, Opinions, Book II.
A father is held to have received the dowry with the consent of his daughter,
when the latter has no good reason to advance in opposition to his claim, and
especially if she has afterwards been endowed by him with a larger sum.

38. Marcellus, Opinions.
Lucius Titius, while under paternal control, married Maevia with the consent of
his father, and the latter received the dowry. Maevia then served notice of
repudiation on Titius, and his father afterwards, in the absence of his son who
had been repudiated, entered into an engagement of betrothal with her in the
name of his said son. Maevia then served notice of the repudiation of the
betrothal, and married another man. I ask if Maevia should bring an action for
the recovery of her dowry against Lucius Titius, her former husband, to whom
the dowry was left as heir to his father, and it should be proved that the
marriage was dissolved through the fault of the woman, whether the dowry could
be retained by the husband on the ground that she was to blame? Marcellus
answered that even if Lucius Titius should be sued
as the heir appointed by his father, still, if he had not consented to the
betrothal, the fault of the woman should be punished by a fine.

39. Papinianus, Questions, Book XL
Where a husband and a wife accuse one another in court of bad conduct, and the
judge declares that both of them have given cause for repudiation, the decision
should be understood to mean that, as both had treated the law with contempt,
neither can claim its benefit, as the offence of each is atoned for by that of
the other.

40. The Same, Questions, Book XXVIII.
After the dowry was given and the marriage contracted, the father, with the
consent of his daughter, stipulated that the dowry should be returned to him in
case of divorce. If the condition of this stipulation was complied with, and
the daughter should afterwards die without issue, the father would not be
prevented from suing on the stipulation; but if he wished to do so during the
lifetime of his daughter, he could be barred by an exception.

41. The Same, Questions, Book XXXVII.
Where a father, ignorant that his daughter has been divorced, pays the dowry to
her husband in compliance with his promise, the money can be recovered, not by
the action for the payment of what was not due, but by the action on dowry.

42. The Same, Opinions, Book IV.
Where a father who has given a dowry for his daughter is banished to an island,
an action for its recovery can be brought by the daughter. Moreover, if the
father has been convicted after a divorce has taken place, the action on dowry
can also be brought by the woman, where the father has not already brought it
with her consent.
(1) It is held that the crops of land given by way of dowry and gathered in
good faith, and which have been used to pay the expenses of marriage, before
the question as to the freedom of the wife has been raised, even though it
should afterwards be established that she was a slave, cannot be recovered. It
is proper that expenses which are necessary and useful, and which have been
incurred with reference to land which appeared to belong to the dowry, should
be set off against the profits, and that anything in excess should be restored.
(2) Where a father, after the death of his daughter during marriage, brings an
action under a stipulation, to collect the interest on money which has been
paid by way of dowry, it is held that his son-in-law, who stipulated for the
interest on the remaining part of the dowry, can justly claim a set off against
the amount which is due, if he supported his wife at his own expense;
otherwise, if she was supported by her father, the stipulation for the
interest, being void, will not secure to the son-in-law the benefit of the set-
off.
(3) If, after a divorce, the wife returns to her husband, the judgment obtained
on a stipulation which a stranger who gave the dowry
entered into will not be annulled, nor can a release be ordered by the court.

43. Scaevola, Questions, Book II.
Where a husband has judgment rendered against him for a sum which he is able to
pay, and he has claims equal to, but not greater than the amount of the dowry,
he will not be compelled to assign his rights of action.

44. Paulus, Questions, Book V.
If a father-in-law, appointed heir by his son-in-law, enters upon his estate,
and the father dies, his daughter can bring an action on dowry, so Nerva and
Cato hold; and this opinion is also stated by Sextus Pomponius in the Fifth
Book of the Digest of Aristo. Pomponius, in the same place, agrees with Aristo.
I, however, will say that if the father should emancipate his daughter, he also
can be sued by her.
(1) Lucius Titius promised Gaius Seius a hundred aurei by way of dowry for his
daughter, and it was agreed between Gaius Seius and Lucius Titius, the father
of the woman, that the dowry could not be demanded of the husband during the
lifetime of Lucius Titius, that is, the father of the woman. The marriage was
afterwards dissolved by a divorce through the fault of the husband, and the
father of the woman, having died, appointed other heirs, after disinheriting
his daughter. I ask whether the husband could collect the dowry from the heirs
of his father-in-law since he was obliged to return it to the woman?
I answered that since the daughter was entitled to an action to recover her
dowry, as other heirs had been appointed by her father, her husband would be
required either to surrender the actual dowry to her, or assign her his rights
of action, and that the heirs of the father-in-law would not have a right to
plead an exception against him; since it would be absurd for a party to be
considered guilty of bad faith when he demands a sum of money to be refunded,
not to him whom he sued, but to another.
On the other hand, if the divorce had taken place after the death of the
father, and before the dowry had been demanded, the husband would be excluded
from bringing an action for the dowry, which should not be admitted. But even
if the daughter had been appointed heir to a part of her father's estate, the
husband should bring suit against her co-heirs for their individual proportions
of the dowry, and either return to the woman what he collects, or assign to her
his rights of action.

45. The Same, Questions, Book VI.
Gaius Seius, the maternal grandfather of Seia, who was under paternal control,
gave a certain sum of money by way of dowry to Lucius Titius, her husband, and
inserted in the dotal instrument the following agreement and stipulation: "If a
divorce should take place between Lucius Titius, the husband, and Seia, without
her fault, all the dowry shall be returned to Seia, his wife, or to Gaius
Seius, her maternal grandfather".
I ask, if Seius, the maternal grandfather, should die immediately after making
this agreement, and Seia should subsequently, without being to blame, be
divorced during the lifetime of her father, under whose control she was, in
favor of whom an action would lie under the agreement in the stipulation, the
heir of the maternal grandfather, or of his granddaughter. I answered that the
stipulation would seem to be void, so far as the granddaughter personally was
concerned, as the maternal grandfather made the stipulation in her favor; for,
since this is true, a right of action would be held to lie in favor of the heir
of the stipulator, whenever the woman was divorced.
It must be said, however, that the dowry can be paid to Seia, even though no
action will lie directly in her favor; just as if her grandfather had
stipulated that it should be given to him, or to someone else. The
granddaughter ought, however, on account of the agreement of her grandfather,
to be permitted to bring an equitable action to prevent her from being
defrauded of the benefit of the dowry; or recourse to this proceeding should be
had because of the favor conceded to marriage, and especially on account of the
affection existing between the parties.

46. The Same, Questions, Book XIX.
Where a person promised a dowry to a wife by a stipulation, and bequeathed
certain property to her by a will, but under the condition that she should not
claim the dowry from his heir, she was unable to receive the property
bequeathed to her. I answered that an action on dowry against the heirs should
not be denied the woman.

47. Scaevola, Questions, Book XVII.
Where a woman commits adultery through the agency of her husband, he can retain
none of her dowry; for why should a husband disapprove of acts which he himself
either previously corruptly caused, or subsequently assented to? If, however,
anyone should maintain that, according to the spirit of the law, a husband who
afforded an opportunity to his wife to prostitute herself cannot accuse her,
his opinion must be held to be correct.

48. Callistratus, Questions, Book II.
If it was stipulated in the dotal instrument that the dowry should remain in
the hands of the husband for the benefit of the children, it can also be
retained by him for the benefit of the grandchildren.

49. Paulus, Opinions, Book VII.
Maevia, among other property constituting her dowry, also delivered to her
husband an instrument calling for ten solidi, which a certain Otacilius had
executed in favor of the said Maevia, stating that he would give her ten
thousand solidi when she was married; and the husband made no claim to this
obligation because he could not do so. The question arose if the dowry should
be demanded of the husband, whether he could be compelled also to refund that
sum which was
included in the said obligation. I answered that the husband could sue the
debtor, as his wife's rights of action had been transferred to him, but that if
he could not claim the money without being guilty of bad faith or negligence,
he could neither be sued on account of the dowry, nor in an action on mandate.
(1) A tract of land, after having been appraised and given by way of dowry, was
taken by a prior creditor on account of its having been pledged. The question
arose whether the woman, in case she claimed the value of the dowry from her
husband, should be barred by an exception; for it is held that she is not
bound, because her father gave her the dowry for herself and she was not his
heir. Paulus answered that where the land was evicted without either the bad
faith or negligence of her husband, the latter could interpose an exception on
the ground of fraud against the woman, claiming the amount of the dowry, as it
would evidently be unjust for her to recover the value of the land, as the
fraud of the father should only injure the daughter herself.

50. Scaevola, Opinions, Book II.
Certain property, after having been appraised, was given by way of dowry, and
an agreement was drawn up stating that if the dowry was to be returned for any
reason whatsoever, the identical property should be given up, and an account
taken of its increase or diminution in accordance with the judgment of a good
citizen; and so far as any property which was no longer in existence was
concerned, its value should be estimated in accordance with its original
valuation.
The question arose whether, in case certain property which the husband had sold
was still in existence, it should belong to the woman in accordance with the
agreement. I answered that if such property was in existence, and had been sold
without the consent of the woman or her subsequent ratification, it must be
returned; just as if no appraisement had taken place.

51. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book II.
Where property has been appraised, it is at the risk of the husband, even
though it may have become deteriorated by the use of the wife.

52. Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book VII.
A husband, after a divorce, through mistake paid a dowry which he had not
received. He can recover it, because he can prove that it had not been paid to
him, for it can not be exacted from him.

53. The Same, Disputations, Book XII.
If a dowry should be given to a son under paternal control, he himself will be
liable to an action on dowry; his father, however, will be liable to one to the
amount of the peculium. It makes no difference whether or not the party has the
property in the peculium, or holds it as dowry, but judgment should be rendered
against him to the extent of his ability to make payment. It is understood,
however, that
his ability to pay is dependent upon the amount of the peculium which he had at
the time the judgment was rendered against him.
But if an action is brought against the father, whatever the son owes the
latter or other persons under his control must be deducted from the peculium;
but if an action is brought against the son himself, no deduction can be made
of any other debt, when taking into consideration the amount that the son is
able to pay.

54. Paulus, On Individual Rights.
The ability of a husband to pay is estimated without the deduction of any debt;
and the same rule applies to a partner, a patron, and a parent. Where, however,
anyone is sued on account of a donation, her pecuniary resources are estimated
after all his debts have been deducted.

55. The Same, On Plautius, Book III.
When a woman brings an action for the recovery of her dowry, after her marriage
has been dissolved, she must indemnify her husband where he has given security
against the infliction of threatened injury, if she wishes to recover her
dowry, so that she may secure her husband against any risk.

56. The Same, On Plautius, Book VI.
If anyone stipulates with a husband as follows: "If, for any reason, Titia
ceases to be your wife, you must surrender her dowry"; by this general
statement the stipulation becomes effective, whether the woman is taken captive
by the enemy, or whether she is banished or reduced to slavery, for in such a
clause all such accidents are included.
If, however, the terms of the stipulation are strictly construed, will this
apply where the woman dies, or is divorced? It is held to be more equitable
that it should apply in case of death.

57. Marcellus, Digest, Book VII.
Where an usufruct is given by way of dowry, and a divorce takes place, the
ownership of the property will not vest in either the husband or the wife, and
where the restitution of the dowry is to be made, the husband must give
security that, as long as he lives, the woman and her heirs will be allowed to
enjoy the usufruct. I doubt whether this addition with reference to the heirs
is correct, for it makes a difference in what way the usufruct was given, as
dowry; since if the woman is to have the profits, the usufruct at her death
will pass to her husband, to whom the ownership of the property belongs, and
she will leave no right in the same to her heir, for the usufruct will then be
due to her husband; as it is not customary for it to pass to the heir.
But if the woman granted the usufruct with the land to her husband, it must be
restored by him to her heirs, since it passes along with property to her heirs,
if her husband was not in default in surrendering it. But, if the property has
been alienated, or anyone had given the usufruct of his land, by order of the
wife, to her husband as dowry, it must first be considered in what way it can
be restored to
the woman. This may be accomplished either by means of security given by the
husband, or he can assign his rights to his wife as far as he is able to do so,
and allow her to enjoy the property; or he can make some arrangement with the
owner of the same, so that, with the consent of the latter, the usufruct can be
transferred to the woman, as he can either grant her the usufruct of the land
or give her something instead of it, as may be agreed upon between them. For,
suppose that the woman should sell the usufruct to the owner of the property;
in this instance, it would not be inequitable for the husband to be compelled
to transfer the usufruct, since he can even be sued by the heir of the woman,
for if he had not been in default in making the transfer, she could have left
the price of the usufruct to her heir. If, however, she did not have the power
to sell the usufruct to the owner of the property, the husband would be forced
to allow the heir to gather the crops, which privilege he was obliged to grant
to the woman herself.

58. Modestinus, On Discoveries.
Where a dotal slave is appointed heir by anyone, he can either enter upon the
estate, or reject it, by order of the husband. But in order to avoid the
husband from being liable to an action on dowry, either through too readily
rejecting an estate, or rashly accepting it, when its condition is unknown, it
is advised that the woman should be asked, in the presence of witnesses,
whether she wishes to reject or accept the estate. If she should say that she
rejects it, the slave can very readily repudiate it, by the order of her
husband. If, however, she prefers to accept it, the slave must be restored by
the husband to the wife under the condition that when, by her order, he enters
upon the estate, he shall again be transferred to her husband. In this way
provision is made for any anxiety the husband may experience, and the wish of
the wife will be complied with.

59. Julianus, On Urseius Ferox, Book II.
The husband of my daughter, who was emancipated, and ill at the time, sent her
a notice of repudiation, so that, after her death, he could the more readily
deliver her dowry to her heirs than to me. Sabinus said that an equitable
action should be granted me for the recovery of the dowry, and Gaius holds the
same opinion.

60. Proculus, Epistles, Book V.
Where a daughter under paternal control, who was married, dies, and her father
pays her funeral expenses, he can immediately recover them by means of an
action, even though the son-in-law was obliged to return the dowry after a
certain date; and after he has received the expenses of the funeral, the
remainder of the dowry can be paid at the time agreed upon.

61. Papinianus, Questions, Book XI.
A husband manumitted a dotal slave without the consent of his wife. He was then
appointed sole heir by the freedman to a share of
the estate which he could, and should have acquired as patron, and ought have
returned to his wife; the remaining portion, however, she will be entitled to
recover by means of a dotal action, provided she was opposed to the manumission
of the slave.

62. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIII.
If a husband should manumit dotal slaves with the consent of his wife, it is
just as if she intended to donate them to him, and he will not be liable to any
claim on account of having given them their freedom.

63. Paulus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book II.
In this instance, the slave ceases to be a part of the dowry, as where anyone
is permitted to donate a slave for the purpose of manumitting him, it is the
same as if the slave was donated, because permission was given to manumit him.

64. Ulpianus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book VII.
Where, however, a husband who is transacting the business of his wife, with her
consent, manumits a dotal slave, with her permission, he must restore to his
wife whatever may have come into his hands through the said slave.
(1) If he imposes any conditions upon the slave in consideration of his
freedom, he must be responsible for this to his wife.
(2) It is evident if any services should be performed by the freedman for the
husband, and no appraisement of them should be made, it will not be just for
the husband to pay anything to the wife on this account.
(3) But if any charge was imposed upon the freedman after manumission, this
must be accounted for to the wife.
(4) Where, however, the freedman is the debtor of the husband, or has rendered
himself liable for any other obligation, he must assign the claim which he
holds against him to his wife.
(5) He is also compelled to deliver to his wife any of the property of the
freedman, which may come into his hands, provided he acquired it in the
capacity of patron. If, however, he acquires it in any other way, he is not
compelled to transfer it, for he is not liable to his wife for anything which
the freedman gives to him gratuitously, but only for what he acquires, or can
acquire under his rights as patron.
It is evident that if he is appointed heir by the freedman to the greater
portion of the debt which the latter owes him, he will not be responsible for
the excess; and if the freedman should constitute him his heir when he is not
indebted to him, he will not be bound to give anything to his wife.
(6) He must, however (as the law declares), give "whatever may come into his
hands". We understand this to mean whatever he collects, or can collect,
because a right of action to do so is granted him.
(7) It is added in the law that the husband shall be liable where he has
committed any fraudulent act to prevent the property from coming into his
hands.
(8) If a patron disinherits his son, and the property of the freedman should be
obtained by the latter, it must be considered whether the heir will be liable
on this ground. And, also, where nothing comes into the hands of the patron
himself, or into the hands of his heir, how can be become liable on this
account?
(9) The law only speaks of the husband and his heir. Nothing is mentioned in it
with reference to a father-in-law and his successors; and Labeo notices this as
having been omitted. In these instances, therefore, the law is defective, and
not even a praetorian action can be granted.
(10) Where the law says that the husband shall give up the money which he has
received, it is evident that it did not intend that he should surrender the
estate itself, but only the value of the same, or of the property of the
freedman; unless the husband should prefer to surrender the property itself,
and this should be admitted as the more favorable construction.

65. Scaevola, Questions Publicly Treated.
This action can be brought by the wife even during marriage.

66. Javolenus, On the Last Works of Labeo, Book VI.
Servius says that the husband is responsible for fraud and negligence with
reference to all the property belonging to the dowry, which he has received,
excepting money. This is also the opinion of Publius Mucius, for he decided in
the case of Licinnia, the wife of Gracchus, whose dotal property had been lost
in the sedition in which Gracchus was killed; as he held that the property
should be restored to Licinnia, for the reason that Gracchus was to blame for
the sedition.
(1) A husband gave money to his wife's slave for the purchase of clothing, and
this having been procured, a divorce took place within a year. It was held by
Labeo and Trebatius that the clothing should be returned to the husband in the
condition in which it was after the divorce. The rule of law would be the same
if the husband had purchased the clothing and given it to the slave. If,
however, the clothing should not be returned, the price of it can be set off by
the husband against the dowry.
(2) A father ordered his daughter, who was under his control, to return her
dowry to her father-in-law, a divorce having taken place; and after a part of
the dowry had been paid, the father died. Labeo and Trebatius think that the
remainder, if it had not been delegated or promised to be renewed to the
father-in-law, should be paid to her; and this is correct.
(3) You received, by way of dowry, certain slaves whose value had been
appraised, and an agreement was then entered into that, in case of a divorce,
you should return slaves of equal value, but no mention was made of the
offspring of female slaves forming part of the dowry. Labeo says that this
offspring will belong to you, because it
should be yours on account of the risk of losing the slaves which you are
obliged to assume.
(4) A woman had a hundred aurei in the hands of her husband, as dowry, and a
divorce having taken place, she stipulated through a mistake of her husband
that he should be liable to her for two hundred. Labeo thinks that her husband
will only be responsible for the dowry, whether the woman stipulated for the
amount honestly or dishonestly. I adopt this opinion.
(5) A wife, after her divorce, received part of her dowry, and left part in the
hands of her husband, and afterwards married another man, and then, having
become a widow, she returned to her first husband, to whom she gave a hundred
aurei, by way of dowry, without mentioning the money which remained out of the
former dowry. If another divorce should occur, Labeo says that the husband will
be compelled to return the remainder of the first dowry, under the same terms
that he would have returned it if the first divorce had not taken place between
them, as the remainder of the former dowry was transferred to the obligation of
the second one. This I think to be correct.
(6) When a husband, without the order of his wife, during marriage, releases
his father-in-law from the dowry which he had promised, Labeo says that this
will be at the risk of the husband, even though it was done on account of the
poverty of the father-in-law. This is true.
(7) Where anyone promises a dowry to a husband in behalf of his wife, and then,
after having appointed the woman his heir, dies, Labeo says that the woman must
assume the risk of that part of the dowry for which the husband was liable, for
the reason that it would not be just for her to be enriched at the expense of
her husband, and to hold him responsible for what he could not have exacted
from her. I think that this is correct.

67. Pomponius, Epistles, Book XX.
Whatever a husband must restore to his wife out of the peculium of a slave will
form part of the dowry which is to be given up, and therefore the husband will
be liable for fraud and negligence in the acquisition or preservation of the
said peculium; and the profits obtained from the same, just as those of any
other dotal property will belong to the husband.
