# -*- mode: org -*-

BOOK XXI.
TITLE I.
CONCERNING THE EDICT OF THE AEDILES, AND THE ACTIONS TO COMPEL THE VENDOR TO
TAKE BACK THE PROPERTY WHERE HE HAS RECEIVED MORE THAN IT WAS WORTH
................................. 154
TITLE II. CONCERNING EVICTIONS, AND THE STIPULATION FOR DOUBLE DAMAGES .. 184
TITLE III.
CONCERNING THE EXCEPTION ON THE GROUND OF PROPERTY SOLD AND
DELIVERED................................................... 206



THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS. BOOK XXI.
TITLE I.
CONCERNING THE EDICT OF THE AEDILES, AND THE ACTIONS TO COMPEL THE VENDOR TO
TAKE BACK THE PROPERTY WHERE HE HAS RECEIVED MORE THAN IT WAS
WORTH.
1. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
Labeo states that the Edict of the CuruleAEdiles has reference to sales of
property, whether it consists of land, portable articles, or of such as moves
itself.
(1) The AEdiles say: "Those who sell slaves should notify the purchasers if they
have any diseases or defects, if they have the habit of running away, or
wandering, or have not been released from liability for damage which they have
committed. All of these things must be publicly stated at the time that the
slaves are sold. If a slave should be sold in violation of this provision, or
contrary to what has been said and promised at the time the sale took place, on
account of which it may be held that the purchaser and all the parties
interested should be indemnified, we will grant an action to compel the vendor
to take back the said slave.
"If, however, after the sale and delivery, the value of said slave shall have
been diminished by the act of the slaves of the purchaser, or of his agent; or
where a female slave has had a child after the sale; or, if any accession has
been made to the property growing out of the sale; or if the purchaser has
obtained any profit from said property, he must restore the whole of it.
Moreover, if he himself made any additions to the property, he can recover the
same from the vendor.
"Again, if the slave has committed an unlawful act punishable with death, if he
has been guilty of any act against the life of some one, or if he has been
introduced into the arena for the purpose of fighting wild beasts; all these
things must be stated at the time of the sale; for in these instances we will
grant an action for the return of the slave. Further, we will also grant an
action where a party is proved to have knowingly, and in bad faith, sold a
slave in violation of these provisions."
(2) The reason for the promulgation of this Edict was to prevent the frauds of
vendors, and to provide relief for such purchasers as have been deceived by
vendors. We must, however, understand that the vendor, even if he was ignorant
of those things which the AEdiles ordered to be observed, will still be liable;
and this is not unjust, for a vendor can readily obtain knowledge of these
matters, nor does it make any difference to the purchaser why he is deceived,
whether through the ignorance, or the cunning of the vendor.
VOL. 5]
(3) It must be remembered that this Edict does not have reference to sales made
by the Treasury.
(4) Where, however, the Government makes the sale, this Edict will apply.
(5) It is also applicable to the sale of property belonging to wards.
(6) Where the defect, or the disease of a slave is apparent, as is very
frequently the case, where defects are manifest from certain indications, it
can be said that the Edict does not apply. Provision should only be made to
prevent the purchaser from being deceived.
(7) It should be noted that disease is defined by Sabinus to be some condition
of the body which renders it less able to perform the functions for which
Nature has bestowed upon us corporeal health. In some cases, disease affects
the entire body, in others only a portion of the same, for instance
consumption, that is to say, a wasting; a fever is a malady of the entire body;
blindness, for example, is the malady of a part, although a man may be born in
this condition.
There is a great difference between a defect and a disease, as where someone is
a stammerer, for this is rather a blemish than a state of ill-health. I think
that it is for the sake of removing all doubt on this subject, that the AEdiles
have made use of the term "the same," in order that no uncertainty may remain.
(8) Hence, if the defect or disease is such as to interfere with the use and
services of the slave, it will afford ground for the action to compel him to be
taken back; but we must remember that any very trifling affection or fault
cannot cause the slave to be considered sickly or unsound. Therefore, a slight
feverishness, or an old quartan fever, which at the time is about to disappear,
or a trifling wound will not cause the vendor to be considered at fault,
because he did not call attention to it; for things of this kind can be passed
over. We will now give some examples of slaves who are diseased and unsound.
(9) It is asked by Vivianus, whether a slave who did not always manifest signs
of insanity, and sometimes spoke rationally, should still be considered sane.
Vivianus says that he is sane, nevertheless; for we should understand that some
persons are of sound mind although they may sometimes exhibit mental defects;
otherwise, he states that the result would be that we would deny an infinite
number of persons to be sane in accordance with this principle, as, for
instance, those who are giddy, superstitious, irascible, and insolent, as well
as others who have similar mental defects. More, however, is guaranteed with
reference to soundness of body than respecting mental defects. For he asserts
that a corporeal defect will sometimes extend to and vitiate the mind, for
example, where a man is said to have his mind affected as the result of fever.
What must be done in a case of this kind? If the mental defect is such that
attention should have been called to it by the vendor, and he did not do so
when he was aware that it existed, he will be liable to an action on purchase.
(10) Vivianus also holds that although a slave may have run around temples in a
distracted manner, and given oracular answers; still, if he was not accustomed
to act in this manner at the time when he was sold, this is no defect; nor will
an action lie because he occasionally conducted himself in this way; just as
none will lie where he formerly had had a fever. But if he continues to be
addicted to this vicious habit, and is accustomed to run distractedly around
temples, and give oracular answers, as if demented; even if he does this
through sport, it is a defect, but a defect of the mind, and not of the body,
and therefore he cannot be returned; as the AEdiles only mention corporeal
blemishes; nevertheless, an action on purchase can be brought against the
vendor.
(11) He also says that the same rule applies with reference to slaves who are
beyond measure timid, greedy, avaricious, or irascible,
2. Paulus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I. Or melancholy,
3. Gaius, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
Or insolent, humpbacked, crooked, or affected with some skin disease, or with
the itch, or dumb or deaf:
4. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
And he denies that a slave can be returned on account of these defects, but he
grants an action on purchase.
(1) If, however, a bodily defect influences the mind, for instance where a
slave speaks disconnectedly on account of fever, or makes ridiculous speeches
in public, like an insane person, where the mental defect is caused by a
corporeal one, he can be returned.
(2) Pomponius says that certain authorities held that slaves who are gamblers
and given to wine are not included in the Edict, just as those who are
gluttons, impostors, liars, or quarrelsome, are not included.
(3) Pomponius also says that although the vendor is not compelled to guarantee
that his slave is very intelligent, still, if when he sells him he is so stupid
or foolish that no use can be made of him, this will be considered a defect. We
see that the rule is adopted that the terms "defect" and "disease" are only
applicable to the body, but the vendor is not required to guarantee a slave to
be free from a mental defect, unless he specially stated the fact, otherwise,
he will not be liable; and hence an express exception was made with reference
to slaves who are wanderers, and accustomed to run away, for these are mental
and not bodily defects. Wherefore, some authorities hold that animals that are
timorous and in the habit of kicking should not be classed with such as are
unsound, for these are mental and not physical defects.
(4) In a word, no matter how serious the mental defect may be, it will not
afford ground for a return of the property, unless it was
represented not to exist, when in fact it did. An action on sale, however, can
be brought where the vendor knowingly concealed the mental defect, but where
the defect is a corporeal one alone, or affects both the body and the mind, the
property can be returned on this account.
(5) It should be noted that mention is made in general terms of disease, and
not of any dangerous ailment. Pomponius says that this should not seem
extraordinary, for nothing there has reference to matters to which a disease of
this kind is a hindrance.
(6) He also says that it is not every disease which affords a ground for the
return of property, as, for instance, an insignificant running of the eyes, or
a trifling pain in the teeth or the ear, or a small sore, nor, in fact, does
any slight fever come within the scope of this Edict.
5. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book XL
There is as much difference between these blemishes which the Greeks call
"defectiveness" and disorders, or diseases, or illness, as there is between
such corporeal imperfections and ailments which render a slave incapable of
service.
6. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.Pomponius very properly
says that this Edict has reference not
only to chronic diseases, but also to such as are temporary in their character.
(1) Trebatius says that tetter is not a disease, if the slave can make use of
the limb upon which it appears as well as he can of the other. This opinion of
Trebatius appears to me to be correct.
(2) A slave who has been castrated is not, I think, diseased or defective, but
sound; just as one who has but one testicle, who is still capable of
reproduction.
7. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XL
Where, however, a slave has been castrated in such a way that any part of his
body required for the purpose of generation is absolutely absent, he is
considered to be diseased.
8. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
It has been asked whether a slave whose tongue has been cut off is to be
considered sound. This inquiry is put by Ofilius with reference to a horse, and
he says that the horse should not be held to be sound.
9. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XLIV.
Sabinus says that a dumb person is diseased, for it is evident that to be
deprived of speech is a disease. A person who speaks with difficulty, however,
is not diseased, any more than one is whom it is hard to understand; and it is
clear that one whose words are without any meaning is diseased.
10. The Same, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.Ofilius also says that
where a finger of the slave has been cut off,
or any portion of one of his members lacerated, even though he should
recover from the injury, still, if his services are less available on this
account, he is not held to be sound.
(1) I read also that Cato said that: "Where a finger has been cut off from the
hand, or a toe from the foot of a slave, he is diseased." This is correct,
according to the distinction above mentioned.
(2) Moreover, where a slave has more than the ordinary number of fingers or
toes, and his movements are not impeded in any way by their number, there is no
ground for his return; because the number of his fingers or toes should not be
taken into account, but whether he is able to make use of a larger or smaller
number without any difficulty.
(3) The question has been asked whether a near-sighted slave is sound, and I
think that he should be returned.
(4) Partial blindness is held to be a disease, that is to say, where a slave
cannot see either in the morning or evening, which species of ailment the
Greeks call weakness of eyesight. Some persons think that this affection is the
same as that where a man sees nothing when a light is brought near him.
(5) It has been asked whether a stammerer, one who lisps or speaks
inarticulately, or very slowly, or who is knock-kneed or bow-legged is sound,
and I think that he is.
11. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book XL
He who has lost a tooth is not diseased, for the greater portion of mankind
have lost some teeth, and are not for that reason considered diseased,
especially since we are born without teeth, and are not less sound on that
account, until we have them; otherwise no old man would be considered healthy.
12. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
Anyone who has a tumor is diseased, as well as one who has a polypus,
(1) Pedius says that a slave who has one eye or one cheek larger than the
other, if he can use them just as well, is considered sound; for he states that
any inequality of the cheeks, eyes, or arms, if they detract nothing from the
services of the slave, do not afford ground for his return. But where one side
is smaller, or one leg shorter, it may offer some impediment, and therefore, in
this instance, the slave can be returned.
(2) Where a slave is born with a goiter, or has prominent eyes, he is
considered sound.
(3) It also should be remembered that a left-handed slave is not diseased or
defective, unless he uses his left hand more frequently on account of the
weakness of his right, but he is then not left-handed, but crippled.
(4) The question arose whether a slave who has a bad breath is sound. Trebatius
says that a person whose breath smells is not diseased any more than one who
smells like a goat, or who squints; for this may happen to anyone on account of
a filthy mouth. But, how-
ever, where this occurs through some bodily defect, for example, from the liver
or the lungs, or from any other similar cause, the slave is diseased.
13. Gaius, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I. A slave who is lame is
also considered diseased.
14. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
The question was asked whether a female slave was diseased who always brought
forth dead children. Sabinus says that if this was caused by an uterine
affection, she must be so considered.
(1) Where a female slave, who is pregnant, is sold, it is held by all the
authorities that she is sound, for it is the greatest and most important
function of a woman to conceive and preserve a child.
(2) A woman in child-birth is also sound, provided nothing else happens which
would cause her some bodily illness.
(3) Cौlius says Trebatius makes a distinction in a case of sterility, for if a
woman is sterile by nature, she is healthy, but if this occurs through some
defect of the body she is not.
(4) The question also arises with reference to one who suffers from
incontinence of urine, and Pedius says that a man is not less healthy on this
account if he passes urine in bed, while overcome with sleep or wine, or where
this occurs through sluggishness in rising. Where, however, he cannot hold back
the collected fluid through some defect of his bladder, a slave can be
returned, not because he passed his urine in bed, but for the reason that he
has a defective bladder; and this opinion is correct.
(5) Pedius also says that if the uvula of anyone is amputated, it prevents
rather than calls for the return of a slave, because the morbid condition is
diminished. I think that if the morbid condition disappears, there will be no
ground for the return, but if the defect remains, there will be ground for it.
(6) Where anyone is born with fingers that are united, he is not considered to
be sound, if he is prevented from using his hands.
(7) Where the vagina of a female slave is so narrow that she cannot become a
woman, it is settled that she should not be considered sound.
(8) Where a slave has enlarged tonsils, the question arises whether he can be
returned as being unsound. If this is understood in the sense in which I think
it is, that is, if the condition has existed for so long a time that the tumors
of the throat which have been formed cannot now be removed, the slave is
unsound.
(9) Where a vendor expressly states that the slave has a certain disease but is
sound in other respects, the parties must abide by what was agreed upon, for
where their rights of action have been relinquished they cannot be permitted to
resume them, unless the vendor knowingly and deliberately concealed the
disease; for, in this instance, a reply should be granted on the ground of
fraud.
(10) Where the existence of a blemish was not expressly mentioned by the
vendor, but it was of such a character that it would be
apparent to everyone; for example, if the slave was blind, or had a manifest
and dangerous scar on his head, or on some other part of his body, Cौcilius
says that the vendor will not be liable on this account, any more than if he
had expressly mentioned the defect, for it is held that the Edict of the AEdiles
has only reference to such diseases and defects as the purchaser was, or could
be ignorant of.
15. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book XL
A female slave who has her periods twice a month is not healthy. The same rule
applies to one who has no such discharge, unless this is due to age.
16. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XXIII.
Where a slave is thoroughly cured, so that he is restored to his former
condition, he must be considered as having never been diseased.
17. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
Ofilius defines a fugitive slave to be one who remains outside the house of his
master for the purpose of taking to flight, or to conceal himself.
(1) Cौlius says that a fugitive slave is one who leaves his master with the
intention of not returning to him, even though, having changed his mind, he
does return; for he says that in an offence of this kind repentance does not
remove guilt.
(2) Cassius, also, states that a fugitive slave is one who leaves his master
with a deliberate intention not to return.
(3) It is also stated by Vivianus that a slave is understood to be a fugitive
more on account of his intention than through the fact of his flight, for a
slave who runs away to escape from an enemy or a robber, or to avoid a fire or
the destruction of a house, although it is true that he is taken to flight,
still he is not a fugitive.
Again, a slave who has fled from a teacher to whom he has been delivered for
the purpose of instruction is not a fugitive, if, perchance, he took to flight
because he was badly treated by him. He holds the same opinion where a slave
runs away from a party to whom he was lent, if he did so for the same reason.
Vivianus holds the same opinion if the slave runs away because he has been
treated with too much severity. This, however, only applies where he runs away
from those persons and returns to his master, but if he does not return to his
master he says that there is no doubt that he should be considered a fugitive.
(4) Proculus, having been interrogated with reference to a slave who had
concealed himself in the house of his master for the purpose of finding an
opportunity to escape, says that although one who remains in the house cannot
be held to have run away, he is, nevertheless, a fugitive. If, however, he
concealed himself only for the purpose of waiting until his master's anger had
subsided, he is not a fugitive; just as where one whom his master intends to
whip betakes
himself to a friend in order to induce him to intercede for him. Nor is he to
be considered a fugitive who went away for the purpose of committing suicide;
otherwise anyone could call a slave a fugitive who ascended to the top of the
house for the purpose of throwing himself down therefrom, since he should
rather be classed with those intending to commit suicide; for he says that the
opinion held by many unreasoning persons, namely, that he is a fugitive slave
who remains away for a night without his master's consent, is not correct; as
the offence must be determined by the intention of the slave.
(5) Vivianus also says that, where a young slave left the house of his master
and returned to his mother, and the question is asked whether or not he is a
fugitive; he is one if he went away for the purpose of concealing himself to
avoid returning to his master; but if he did so in order the more readily to
obtain pardon for some offence by means of his mother, he is not a fugitive.
(6) Cौlius also stated that if you purchase a slave who had thrown himself into
the Tiber, and who had only left his master with the intention of committing
suicide, he is not a fugitive. If, however, he had the intention to run away in
the first place, and afterwards, having changed his mind, he threw himself into
the Tiber, he is a fugitive. He holds the same opinion in the case of a slave
who hurled himself down from a bridge. All these opinions given by Cौlius are
correct.
(7) He also says that if your slave should run away and take with him his sub-
slave, and the latter unwillingly, or being ignorant of his design, accompanies
him, and having obtained an opportunity to return to you, neglects to do so, he
is not considered to be a fugitive. Where, however, he understood what was
taking place at the time he took to flight, or subsequently learned the
intention of the slave, and could have returned to you, and was unwilling to do
so, it is another thing. He also holds that the same rule should apply to the
case of a slave stolen by a thief.
(8) Cौlius also says that if a slave who was on the land of his master abandons
the house with the intention of running away, and someone seizes him before he
leaves your land, he is to be considered a fugitive; for it is the intention
which renders a slave a fugitive.
(9) He also says that a slave who has only taken one or two steps in attempting
to escape, or has even begun to run, is not a fugitive, if he cannot in his
flight escape from his master who is in pursuit of him.
(10) He also very properly says that flight is a species of liberty, in other
words, that, for the time, he is free from the power of his master.
(11) Where a slave is given in pledge, he still has the debtor as his master;
but if, after the creditor has exercised his right to obtain possession of him,
he runs away from him, he can be considered a fugitive.
(12) It is asked by Labeo and Cौlius, if the slave flees to a place of asylum,
or betakes himself to one where slaves are accustomed to be sold or exposed for
sale, whether he is a fugitive. I think that one
who acts in this way is not a fugitive, because it is held to be lawful to do
so publicly. Nor, indeed, do I think that he is a fugitive who betakes himself
to the statue of the Emperor for refuge, for he does not do this with the
intention of running away.
I also hold the same opinion with reference to one who takes refuge in some
asylum or other place, because he does not do this with the intention of
running away. If, however, he ran away in the beginning, and afterwards betook
himself to the asylum, he is none the less a fugitive on this account.
(13) Cौlius also says that it is settled that he is a fugitive who withdraws to
some place from whence his master will not be able to recover him, and that he
is still more a fugitive who betakes himself to some place from which he cannot
be removed.
(14) Labeo defines a wandering slave as a little vagabond; and, oh the other
hand, a fugitive as a great wanderer. We correctly define a wandering slave as
one who, in fact, does not run away, but frequently roams about, without any
reason, and, after having wasted his time in trifling matters, returns home
late.
(15) It was stated by Cौlius that a freedman lived with his patron, the entire
house being occupied by both. The slave of the freedman went away with the
intention of not returning to him, but remained concealed during the entire
night in the lodging of the patron, and Cौlius says that he is a fugitive.
Cौlius says it is evident that if the entire house was not in charge of both
persons, and the freedman lived in an apartment which was used as a common and
promiscuous passage for all the rooms, the contrary opinion should be held; and
Labeo approves this.
(16) Cौlius also states that where a slave was sent into a province by his
master, and having heard that the latter was dead, and that he had been
liberated by his will, remained in the same employment, and began to conduct
himself as a freedman, he is not a fugitive; for he says he did not become a
fugitive by falsely stating that he was free, because he did this without the
intention of taking to flight.
(17) Where the AEdiles say: "When the slave has not been released from liability
for damage committed," this should be understood to mean that the vendor is not
obliged to state that he has committed no damage, but merely that he is free
from liability for damage committed; that is to say, that he is not subject to
a noxal action. Hence, if the slave committed some damage which has been made
good, he is held to have been released from liability for the same.
(18) We should understand that damages committed against individuals are such
as result from offences which are not public crimes, and are those from which
noxal actions arise, since provision is especially made for capital crimes by
the Edict; but private injuries give rise to pecuniary damages, where a party
refuses to surrender the slave by way of reparation, and prefers to pay the
damages assessed by the court.
(19) Where the slave is one who cannot be manumitted in accordance with the
Imperial Constitutions; or if he has been sold by his
master under the condition that he shall be kept in chains; or where he has
been condemned by someone in authority; or if he is to be sent out of the
country; it is perfectly just that this should be stated at the time when he is
sold.
(20) Where anyone asserts that a slave has some good traits which in fact he
has not, or that he is free from bad habits and this is not the case; as, for
instance, if he should say that he was not a thief, and he is one, or if he
should say that he is a skilled workman, and he is not; for parties of this
kind who do not furnish what they agree to do, are held to have acted contrary
to their statements and promises.
18. Gaius, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
Where a vendor asserts that a slave has some good quality, and the purchaser
complains that this is not true, he will be entitled to an action for the
return or the appraisement of the slave, in order to recover the deficiency in
his value; for example, if he should say that the slave is steady and
industrious, swift of foot, or vigilant, or that he had increased his peculium
on account of his frugality; and he, on the contrary, is ascertained to be
changeable, insolent, lazy, given to sleep, and a glutton. All these things are
considered to signify that what the vendor had asserted cannot be rigorously
exacted from him, but that he must be treated with some degree of moderation;
so that, for instance, if he declared that the slave was steady, such gravity
and constancy as would be shown by a philosopher ought not to be expected from
him; and if he asserted that he was industrious and vigilant, constant labor by
day and night should not be required of him; but all these qualities he should
be expected to possess to a certain extent, according to what is proper and
just.
We understand the same rule to apply to any other statements which the vendor
may make.
(1) Where the vendor says that the slave is an excellent cook, he must furnish
one of the very best belonging to that calling. If, however, he should merely
say that he was a cook, he is held to have complied with his statement if he
furnishes a cook of moderate ability. The same rule applies to other skilled
laborers.
(2) Again, if anyone should merely assert that the slave has a peculium, it is
sufficient if he has only a very small peculium.
19. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
It must, however, be remembered that there are certain things that the vendor
is not obliged to furnish, even though he may state that they exist, for
example, such as relate to the mere commendation of the slave; for instance, if
he should say that he is frugal, honest, and attentive; for, as Pedius says,
there is a good deal of difference where the vendor makes a statement in praise
of the slave, and where he promises that he will furnish what he said he would.
(1) It is evident that if he should say that the slave was not a gambler or a
thief, and had never fled for refuge to the statue of the Emperor, he must make
good these statements.
(2) There is this difference between a statement and a promise, for we
understand a statement to be merely what is uttered in speech and terminated by
the words themselves; a promise, however, may be either a bare assurance that
something will be done, or one that can be exacted, or one based on an
agreement. In accordance with this, he who promised anything to a party
stipulating for it in a case of this kind can either be sued in an action on
stipulation, or in one for the return of the property, which is not unusual;
since a party who can be sued in an action on purchase can also be proceeded
against by means of an action to recover the property.
(3) Those things are only to be considered as stated or promised which are
spoken in order to form the basis of an obligation, and not by way of praise.
(4) It must be noted that where a party promises a slave who is a skilled
workman, or states that the slave is such, he is by no means required to
furnish one who is perfect, but one who is, to a certain extent dexterous; so
that you will not be led to believe that he is either highly accomplished, or,
on the other hand, that he has no knowledge of his trade. Therefore, it will be
sufficient if the slave belongs to the class commonly called artisans.
(5) The AEdiles further say, "We will grant an action to the purchaser and to
all those whom this matter concerns." Thus they promise an action to the
purchaser and to his successors who are entitled to all his rights. We should
consider the purchaser to be the party who buys the property for a price;
where, however, anyone makes an exchange, it must be said that he occupies the
position of both purchaser and vendor, and both can proceed under this Edict.
(6) The time fixed for the return of the property is six available months. If,
however, the slave is not returned, but an action is brought for the deficiency
in his value, this can be done within a year. Moreover, the time allowed for
the return begins to run from the day of the sale, or, where anything has been
stated or promised, from the day on which the statement or promise was made.
20. Gaius, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
If, however, the statement was made some time before the sale, and then a
stipulation was entered into several days afterwards, Cौlius Sabinus says that
the purchaser can institute proceedings on this ground from the day when the
slave was sold.
21. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
To return property is to cause the vendor to take back what he had in the first
place, and because this is effected by giving it up, this is called a
surrender, or restitution of the property, so to speak.
(1) Pomponius says that where a slave is returned to the vendor by the
purchaser, the latter must promise to make good any loss resulting from his bad
faith; and therefore security is necessary to provide against the slave having
been given in pledge by the purchaser, or his having been ordered to commit
theft from, or cause some injury to, him to whom he was given up.
(2) Pomponius also says that security should sometimes be given on both sides,
not only for the past but also for the future; as, for example, where the
purchaser, or his agent, joins issue on behalf of the slave who is returned; or
where proceedings are instituted against the slave; or where he himself brings
suit in his own name.
He says, moreover, that security must be given where the purchaser has judgment
rendered against him without any bad faith on his part, or makes payment, as,
in these instances, it is no more than proper for him to furnish a guarantee;
or where he acquires anything from the legal proceedings which he instituted;
or where he has been guilty of fraud or negligence to prevent property from
coming into his hands, this should be delivered to the vendor at the same time.
(3) He also says that the purchaser should give security for the future to him
who knowingly sold him a slave who was accustomed to run away, if the slave
took to flight without the fault of the purchaser, and the vendor,
notwithstanding, had judgment rendered against him, for the purchaser must then
give security that he will pursue the slave, and, if he recovers him, return
him to the vendor:
22. Gaius, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
And that neither he nor his heir will do anything to prevent the vendor from
recovering his slave.
23. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.Moreover, when the
return is made of the slave, if the latter has
been injured in mind or body by the purchaser, he must make good the damage to
the vendor; as, for example, if the slave has been corrupted, or has become a
fugitive through the cruel treatment of the purchaser. Therefore, as Pomponius
says, it must be determined by the judge to what extent the slave has been
depreciated in value, and the amount must be made good to the vendor. If,
however, the slave was returned without resorting to judicial proceedings, and
the purchaser refuses to give up the other property which we have mentioned, an
action on sale will be sufficient to secure the rights of the vendor.
(1) The AEdiles direct all accessions to the sale also to be returned, and any
additions which the vendor himself has furnished must likewise be made good; so
that neither party, if the sale is rescinded, will obtain anything more than he
would have had if the sale had not been
made.
(2) Where a slave has committed a capital crime, this also must be mentioned.
To commit a capital crime is to be guilty of an offence which is punishable
with death, for the ancients were accustomed to put the crime for the penalty.
We understand a capital crime to be one perpetrated through fraud and malicious
intent, but where anyone commits an offence by mistake or accident, the Edict
does not apply. Wherefore, Pomponius says that a person who has not reached
puberty, or one who is insane, cannot be held to have committed a capital
crime.
(3) Where a slave has made an attempt to put an end to his own life, this also
must be mentioned. He is considered a bad slave who
has committed some act for the purpose of terminating his existence; as, for
example, one who has made a noose out of a rope, or taken some poisonous drug,
or thrown himself down from a high place, or does something else by which he
expects his death will be caused; since he is one who will probably try to do
to another what he attempted against himself.
(4) Where the party who sold an unsound slave is either himself a slave, or a
son under paternal control, an action de peculio, based upon the Edict of the
AEdiles, will lie against the master or the father, for although these actions
seem to be penal ones, still, as they arise out of a contract, it must be said
that they can be brought in the name of those who are under the control of
others. Hence, where a son subject to paternal authority, or a female slave,
made the sale, it must also be held that the actions established by the Edict
of the AEdiles will be available.
(5) The actions arising from this Edict can also be brought against all kinds
of heirs.
(6) Although men who are free may be serving us in good faith as slaves, or
slaves belonging to another may have made the sale, it can be stated that they
also are included in this Edict.
(7) Julianus says that the judgment in a case involving the return of property
restores both parties, that is to say the vendor, as well as the purchaser,
completely to their former condition.
(8) Wherefore, where the slave steals something either from the purchaser or
from someone else on account of which theft the purchaser may be compelled to
make restitution, he will not be ordered to return the slave to the vendor
unless the latter indemnifies him. But what, said Julianus, if the vendor
should refuse to receive the slave? He holds that he would not be forced to
indemnify him to any extent, any more than to have judgment rendered against
him for the price; and that the purchaser must suffer this loss through his own
negligence, because when he could have delivered up the slave by way of
reparation, he preferred to pay the damages assessed by the court.
It seems to me that the opinion of Julianus is the more equitable one.
(9) If, where the slave is returned, anything has come into the hands of the
purchaser by means of said slave, or did not come into his hands through his
own fault, it must be returned; and this includes not only profits which he may
have obtained, or any wages he may have received from the slave, or from anyone
to whom the latter has been hired, but also whatever he may have acquired from
the vendor himself, because he was slow in delivering him the slave; but also
if the purchaser has received any profits from any other possessor whatsoever
he must surrender them all.
Moreover, he must give up what he may have obtained by way of profit, as well
as any legacy or estate which may have fallen to the slave; and it is not taken
into account whether the vendor could or could not have acquired these things
if he had not sold the slave; for if we suppose that the vendor was such a
person as could not receive
anything by will, this fact will in no way prejudice him. Pedius, indeed,
thinks that it should not be considered whether the testator, when he appointed
the slave his heir or bequeathed him a legacy, had this fact in view; because
the sale itself will stand, and this fact will not benefit the purchaser. On
the other hand, he says that if the heir had been appointed in consideration of
the vendor, we will still hold that the purchaser should not restore the estate
to the latter, if he was unwilling to return the slave.
24. Gaius, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.Generally speaking, it
must be held that whatever the slave has
acquired from the purchaser otherwise than in managing his property, it seems
to be just should be returned.
25. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
The AEdiles also desire that the purchaser should indemnify the vendor for any
depreciation of the value of the slave, but only where this took place after
sale and delivery. But if it happened before this, it would not come under this
proceeding.
(1) Therefore, if the purchaser himself, or a member of his household, or his
agent, was responsible for the deterioration, he will be liable to the action.
(2) All who are in servitude are embraced in the term "household," not only
freemen who are serving in good faith as slaves, but also the slaves of others;
those persons who are under the control of the purchaser we understand also to
be included in this definition.
(3) Mention is made in this action of an agent. Neratius, however, says that in
this instance not every kind of an agent is to be understood, but one who has
charge of the entire business of the purchaser, or who has the management of
that branch of it through which the deterioration of the slave was caused.
(4) Pedius states that it is but just that the purchaser should be responsible
for the act of his agent and household only where the slave could not have
suffered the damage if he had not been sold to him. But where he would have
suffered it even if he had not been sold, in this instance the purchaser had
the right to deliver up the slave by way of reparation for the damage
committed, and he says that, with reference to the injury committed by the
agent, the purchaser is only compelled to assign to the vendor the rights of
action which he has against his agent.
(5) But what if the slave had been deteriorated through the negligence, but not
through the fraud of the purchaser? He will have judgment rendered against him
also in this case.
(6) The deterioration sustained by the slave has reference not only to his body
but also to the debasement of his mind; as, for instance, where he has become
corrupted by the example of his fellow-slaves of the household of the
purchaser, and has become a gambler, a drunkard, or a vagabond.
(7) It must, however, be noted that the purchaser is not permitted for reasons
of this kind to surrender the slave by way of repara-
tion, for he is not personally liable for the acts of his slave or for those of
his agent.
(8) It also should be remembered that he must make good all those things which
are mentioned in the Edict of the AEdiles, if they have taken place before issue
has been joined, for it is necessary for them to be enumerated, in order that
they may be taken into account, if any of them occurred before issue was joined
in the case. After issue has been joined, however, the entire question of the
restitution of the slave must be determined in court, and any profits which
have accrued, as well as the fact of the deterioration of the slave, and all
other matters, will be included. For just as soon as the judge obtains
jurisdiction of the case it becomes his duty to decide everything relating to
it. Those questions, however, which have arisen before issue was joined do not
properly come under his jurisdiction, unless they were expressly assigned to
him for his decision.
(9) It is also added in the Edict: "The money paid for the slave to the vendor
and whatever was surrendered on the ground of accessories shall not be
returned, and the party who is liable for the payment of said money shall not
be released."
(10) The AEdiles established the regulation that the purchaser should deliver to
the vendor all those things which have been mentioned above, and that then he
must refund him the purchase-money.
26. Gaius, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
Let us see whether it is not unjust for the purchaser to be compelled to
surrender the property, and have recourse to the action on judgment, if he
could not recover anything on account of the property of the vendor; and should
not matters be so arranged that the purchaser can give security to restore the
slave if the purchase-money is refunded to him within a certain time?
27. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
The purchaser should receive the money which he paid for the slave, as well as
everything else under the head of accessories. We should understand by this not
only the price which was paid to the vendor, as, for instance, the purchase-
money and the interest on the same, but also whatever has been expended on
account of the sale. This, however, should only be paid where the expense was
incurred with the consent of the vendor, but where anything was given
voluntarily, the purchaser will not be entitled to credit for it, for he should
not exact from the vendor what he gave of his own free will. But what if money
had been paid by way of tax, which in fact follows the purchaser? We hold that
this also should be returned, for the purchaser should depart indemnified.
28. Gaius, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
Where a vendor does not furnish security with reference to the matters
mentioned in the Edict of the AEdiles, they promise an action against him for
the return of the property within two months; or one to the extent of the
interest of the purchaser, within six months.
29. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
It must be understood that if the purchaser does not furnish the vendor with
all that is required by this action, he cannot have judgment rendered against
the vendor in his favor. If, however, the vendor does not furnish the purchaser
with what is required, judgment shall be rendered against him.
(1) Again, the purchaser must be released from liability for the money which
was due to him, whether he was responsible to the vendor himself or to someone
else.
(2) Moreover, judgment is rendered against the vendor to the extent of the
interest of the purchaser. Therefore, let us see whether this may exceed the
price or not. And, in fact, the judgment includes the purchase-money as well as
the accessories; but should the purchaser also recover the interest on the
price on the ground that he is entitled to it as a portion of what is due to
him, especially as he restores any profits which he may have acquired? It is
settled that he is entitled to it.
(3) Where the purchaser has sustained any damage, or has expended any money on
account of the slave, he can recover it by the decision of the court in such a
way, however (as Julianus says), that the vendor shall not have judgment
rendered against him on account of these things; but the purchaser shall not be
compelled to surrender the slave to the vendor, unless he indemnifies him.
30. Paulus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.Moreover, if the
purchaser, in an action for the return of a slave,
joins issue, or he himself brings suit in his own name, security must be
furnished by both parties that the vendor will pay the amount of the judgment
rendered against him, where there is no bad faith on his part, and that the
purchaser will deliver to the vendor anything that comes into his hands or
which on account of his bad faith he has been unable to obtain by means of the
action which he has brought in behalf of the slave.
(1) The purchaser shall be entitled to any necessary expenses incurred by him
on account of the illness of the slave after issue has been joined, and Pedius
says that expenses previously incurred should be specifically mentioned; but
Aristo holds that food for the slave should not be taken into account, for the
reason that nothing is demanded for the time that the slave was in service.
31. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
If the vendor refuses to take back the slave, he should not have judgment
rendered against him for a larger amount than the price; hence, with reference
to the damage which the purchaser has sustained on account of the slave, we
only grant the right to retain his person, and the vendor will be able to avoid
liability for this if he refuses to accept the slave, but by doing so he will
not escape liability for the purchase-money, as well as the accessories of the
same.
(1) Where the vendor either stated or guaranteed that the slave was not a
thief, he will be liable on his guarantee if the slave com-
mits a theft; for, in this case, he must be understood to be a thief, not only
if he steals from a stranger, but also if he appropriates the property of his
master.
(2) If a female slave is returned, any children which have been born to her
after the sale must also be given up, whether there is one, or more of them.
(3) Where, however, the usufruct has been added to the mere ownership of the
property, it undoubtedly must also be returned.
(4) Where the slave has acquired a peculium while in the possession of the
purchaser, what shall we say with reference to it? If, indeed, it was obtained
by managing the property of the purchaser, it must be held that it shall remain
with the latter, but if it was obtained from some other source, it must be
surrendered to the vendor.
(5) Where the purchaser leaves several heirs, let us see whether all of them
must consent to the return of the slave. Pomponius says that the consent of all
is not required, and that they can appoint an agent to act for them, in order
that the vendor may not sustain any injury if he receives the share of the
slave owned by one party, and have judgment rendered against him for the shares
of the others to the amount of the deficiency in value of the slave.
(6) He also says that if the slave is dead, or has been taken back by the
vendor, each one of the heirs can properly bring an action for his respective
share. Moreover, they will receive their proportionate shares of the purchase-
money and accessories as well as the profits of the crops and their
accessories; and in case the slave should be deteriorated, each one of them
will be liable pro rata unless it may happen that a division cannot be made;
as, for instance, in the case of the offspring of a female slave; for then the
same rule will be observed which applies where the mother herself is sold,
since we have denied that she herself can be partially returned.
(7) Marcellus also states that if a slave held in common himself purchases a
slave, and, in case he is to be returned, one of his masters can not bring suit
to compel the vendor to take back his share of the slave, any more than where a
purchaser leaves several heirs, and all of them do not give their consent for
the return of a slave.
(8) Marcellus also says that one of two joint-owners of a slave cannot bring an
action on purchase to compel the vendor to surrender to him his half of the
slave, if he pays him his share of the price; and he adds this rule must be
observed in the case of purchasers, for the vendor who sells property which is
pledged has a right to retain the same until the buyer pays for it.
(9) Pomponius holds that if an heir of the purchaser, or his family, or his
agent, either through neglect or malicious intent, commits any act which
diminishes the value of the property, it is but just that he should be liable
for the entire amount by a decision of court.
Moreover, it is more advantageous for all the heirs to appoint a single agent
to bring suit for them; for if the slave is deteriorated by the fault of one of
said heirs, this will be made good by all, and the others will be entitled to
an action in partition against him, because
they sustained the loss on his account, and were prevented from returning the
slave.
(10) Where the vendor leaves several heirs, the slave can be returned to each
one, in proportion to his share in the estate. The same rule applies where the
slave is sold to several parties. For if an individual has purchased a slave
from several owners or several have purchased from one, or several slaves have
been bought from a single owner, the better opinion is that if there are
several vendors, each one of them is absolutely bound to take back the slave;
but where different shares in the slave are purchased from the individual
holders, it may properly be held that one of them can be compelled to take back
his share, and an action can be brought against another to recover the excess
of value paid for the slave. Again, where several persons purchase a slave from
one vendor, then each one of them can institute proceedings for his respective
share; but if they purchase the slave conjointly, each can bring an action for
the return of the slave as a whole.
(11) If the slave who is to be returned should die, the question arises whether
he lost his life through the fault of the purchaser, or his family, or his
agent; as, if this was the case, he is considered to be still alive, and
everything must be transferred to the vendor which would have been required if
the slave had lived.
(12) We understand negligence to mean not only that which is gross, but also
that on account of which it must be held that the purchaser was responsible for
having, in any way, occasioned the death of the slave; as, for instance, if he
did not provide a physician in order that the slave might be cured, or if,
through his own fault, he provided one who was incompetent.
(13) We hold this rule to be applicable where the slave dies before issue has
been joined, but if his decease took place after issue had been joined, then
the judge must decide how the slave died; for, in the opinion of Pedius,
everything that happens after issue has been joined in an action must be
determined by the wisdom of the judge.
(14) What we have stated with reference to an agent also applies to the case of
guardians, curators, and others whose duty it is to appear for others. This is
also the opinion of Pedius, and he adds that it is not unjust to make the
principal responsible for the negligence of those to whom the management of his
business has been entrusted.
(15) Pedius also says that children subject to paternal control are also
included in the term "household," since the action for the return of property
renders all members of the household responsible for their acts.
(16) Where anyone brings an action to recover damages for the diminished value
of a slave, on account of his having taken to flight, and afterwards sues
because the slave is unsound; for what amount should judgment be rendered?
There is no doubt that the action for damages because of the flight of the
slave can be brought several times. Julianus, however, says that care must be
taken to prevent the
purchaser from making a profit, and recovering the appraisement of the same
property twice.
(17) An action in factum for the recovery of the price will lie in case the
slave is returned; in which instance inquiry is not made whether there was good
reason for the return of the slave, but merely where he has been returned. This
is not unreasonable, as it would be unjust, after the vendor by taking back the
slave had acknowledged that there was cause for doing so, for the question to
be asked is whether he should or should not have been returned, nor is any
inquiry made as to whether the return took place within the time established by
law.
(18) It is evident that this action requires the slave to be taken back.
Otherwise, if he was not taken back, the action would fail, even though it was
agreed by the mere consent of the parties that he should be returned. Hence, it
is not the agreement to take him back which establishes the ground for this
proceeding, but the return itself.
(19) Everything which went with the slave at the time of the sale should also
be restored by means of this action.
(20) As the stipulation for double damages is perpetual, it is therefore held
that an action on sale can be brought, even if the vendor has not given
security for double the value of the slave; for matters of usage and custom
should always be included in bona fide actions.
(21) Persons who sell slaves should always state their nationality, at the time
of the sale, for very frequently the place of the nativity of a slave either
attracts or deters the purchaser, and hence it is to our interest to know in
what country he was born; for it is presumed that some slaves are good because
they are sprung from a nation which has not an evil reputation, and others are
considered to be bad because they are derived from a nation which is rather
disreputable than otherwise. If the origin of the slave was not mentioned, an
action on this ground will be granted to the purchaser and to all those
interested in the matter, by means of which the purchaser can compel a slave to
be taken back.
(22) Where property is sold with the understanding that if it does not suit it
may be returned within a specified time, this agreement is held to be valid.
Where, however, nothing was agreed upon with reference to the time, an action
in factum will be granted to the purchaser within sixty available days, to
compel the property to be taken back; but not beyond that period. But, if it
should be agreed that the property can be returned without reference to time, I
think that this contract will be valid. Again where the period of sixty days
fixed for the return of the article has elapsed, an action will be granted to
the purchaser if proper cause be shown.
(23) In this investigation of cause it should be ascertained whether the vendor
was responsible for the delay, or whether he was not present, so that the slave
could be returned to him; or whether there was any other good reason for not
delivering the slave within the time designated because he was not
satisfactory.
(24) The same rule must be observed in these actions as in the case of the
offspring of a female slave, as well as in that of profits, and other
accessories which have been mentioned where a slave to be returned dies before
this is done.
(25) It is held by those learned in the law that any accession to the purchase
is a part of the sale.
32. Gaius, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book II.
Therefore, as has been stated above, the vendor is required to notify the
purchaser of any disease, defect, or other fault, included in the Edict; and as
it is therein set forth that he must guarantee that the slave has none of these
defects, so also, when a slave is transferred to another party as an accessory
to property, the vendor is compelled to make the same declaration and
guarantee. This should be understood to be necessary, not only where it has
been expressly stated that the slave Stichus is an accessory to the land
conveyed, but also where, in general terms, all the slaves on the land
constitute an accessory to the sale.
33. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.Hence Pomponius says
that it is but just that where anything is
alleged to be accessory to a sale, it must be furnished in as perfect a
condition as should have been done if it had been the principal object sold;
for, according to the Civil Law, an action on purchase will lie to compel
property said to be accessory to be furnished in good condition; for example,
where certain casks are mentioned as accessory to land.
This rule, however, only applies where anything is expressly set forth as being
accessory; for if a slave is sold together with his peculium,the vendor will
not be compelled to guarantee the soundness of the slaves forming part of said
peculium, because he did not specify any certain property as being accessory,
and it was only necessary to furnish the peculium in whatever condition it
might be; and just as he was not obliged to furnish a certain amount of
peculium, so likewise, he was not compelled to give this guarantee.
Pomponius says that the same rule should be observed where either an estate or
the peculium of a slave is sold; for the Edict of the AEdiles does not apply to
property belonging to an estate or a peculium. He is of the same opinion where
a tract of land is sold with all the means of cultivating it, and slaves are
included in this designation.
I think that this opinion is correct, unless it is stated that the parties had
some other express intention.
(1) Where property which has been sold is returned, a slave who is an accessory
to the same must also be returned; even though he had no defect.
34. Africanus, Questions, Book VI.
Where several things of the same kind are sold at the same time, as, for
instance, slaves, comedians, or singers, it is held that it must be ascertained
whether one price was paid for all of them, or whether payment was made for
each individually, since sometimes one sale, and
then again, several, are understood to have been made. It is important for this
to be asked, so that if any of said slaves happens to be diseased or unsound,
it may be determined whether all of them should be returned at the same time.
(1) Sometimes, although prices have been fixed for each head, there is still
but one purchase, so that all of them can be, or should be returned on account
of the defect of a single one; for instance, where it is evident that the
intention was to purchase or to sell them all together, as frequently occurs
where slaves are actors; or where four-horse teams, or a pair of mules, are
sold; so that it may be advantageous for the parties to have all, or none of
them.
35. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
It frequently happens that slaves who are sound are returned with others that
are diseased, where they cannot be separated without being inconvenienced, or
without doing violence to natural affection; for what if the purchaser
preferred to retain a son and return his parents, or vice versa? It is
necessary to observe the same rule with reference to brothers, and to slaves
united in marriage.
36. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XXIII.
Where several slaves are sold for one price, and we bring the action under the
Edict of the AEdiles with reference to one of them, an estimate of the value of
said slave is only made where the price was fixed for the entire number
indiscriminately. But if, after the price had been fixed for each one of the
slaves, all of them were sold for an amount equal to the combined prices of the
different individuals, we must then adopt the combined price made for each
slave, whether he is worth more or less.
37. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
The AEdiles direct that a slave who has grown old in service shall not be sold
as one unaccustomed to servitude. This provision of the Edict was framed to
avoid the tricks of vendors, for, in every instance, they take care that
purchasers shall not be deceived by vendors. For example, as many vendors are
accustomed to sell slaves as novices, who are not such, in order that they may
dispose of them for more money, since it is presumed that slaves who are
inexperienced will be more straightforward, better adapted to service, more
tractable and skillful for every kind of work, while those that are experienced
and have grown old in servitude are hard to change, and adapt to one's customs.
Hence, because slave-dealers know that persons are rather inclined to the
purchase of slaves who are novices, they, for this reason, mingle those who are
experienced with them and sell them all for the novices. The AEdiles provide by
this Edict that this shall not be done; and, therefore, where a slave is sold
in this manner to a purchaser who is ignorant of the facts, he can be returned.
38. The Same, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book II.
The AEdiles say: "Those who sell beasts of burden shall state openly and fairly
if they have any disease or defect; and if they have been splen-
didly caparisoned for the purpose of selling them, they shall be delivered to
the purchasers in this condition. If this has not been done, we will grant an
action for the return of the ornaments, or for the return of the animals on
account of the ornaments, within sixty days; or where the sale should be
rescinded by reason of any disease or defect, within six months; or for the
return of the purchase-money where the animals were worth less than they were
sold for within a year. If a pair of beasts of burden are sold at the time, and
one of them is in such a condition that he should be returned, we will grant an
action to enable both of them to be returned."
(1) The AEdiles mention the return of beasts of burden in this Edict.
(2) The reason for the promulgation of this Edict is the same as the one which
prompted that for the return of slaves.
(3) Substantially the same rules are to be observed with reference to them as
with respect to slaves, so far as diseases and defects are concerned. Therefore
what we have already said on this point is also applicable here, and if the
animal should die, he can be returned in the same way as is done in the case of
a slave.
(4) But let us see whether all kinds of cattle are included under the head of
beasts of burden. It is difficult to include them all, for the term "beasts of
burden" means one thing, and that of cattle means another.
(5) Hence a clause has been added to this Edict, the words of which are as
follows: "In the case of all kinds of cattle, vendors must observe the same
rules which we have laid down with reference to the soundness of beasts of
burden."
(6) Wherefore a doubt can no longer exist whether oxen are included in the
terms of this Edict, for although they are not embraced in the designation of
beasts of burden, it is certain that they are included in the term cattle.
(7) There are certain things which are classed as diseases in men which are not
considered such in animals; as, for example, where a horse is castrated, it is
neither considered a disease nor a defect; because this does not detract either
from his strength or his usefulness, although he will never be fit for
reproduction. Cौlius also stated that all animals which have been castrated are
not defective on this account, unless they have become weaker through the
operation, and therefore a mule is not unsound. He says that Ofilius
entertained the same opinion, namely, that a castrated horse is sound, just as
an eunuch is also sound; but if the buyer was ignorant of this and the vendor
knew it, an action on purchase will lie. What Ofilius states is correct.
(8) The question arose, if a mule is such that it cannot be changed when
harnessed, whether it is sound. Pomponius says that it is, for very many
carriage animals are such that their position in harness cannot be changed.
(9) He also says that if an animal is born with such a disposition or form of
body that it cannot be harnessed with another, it is not sound.
(10) An animal can be returned not only on account of some disease, but also
where there is ground for doing so because it does not conform to the
representations or guarantee of the vendor; just as in the case of slaves.
(11) Cौlius says that the rule with reference to the adornment of horses for
the purpose of making a better sale does not apply where this has been done
before the time of the sale, that is to say, two days before; but at the very
time the sale was made, or, when offered for sale, it is exhibited caparisoned
in this manner to those to whom it is expected to sell it. And every time that
such decoration takes place, it is stated both in the action and in the Edict
that the animals have been produced, caparisoned for the purpose of selling
them, as an animal can be produced, caparisoned for the purpose of making a
journey, and afterwards be sold.
(12) Where several animals have been sold, all of them will not be subject to
return on account of the trappings of one of them; for although one team may be
defective, the other should not be returned on this account.
(13) Where a pair of mules is disposed of, one of which is unsound, the value
of the latter is not to be taken into consideration in estimating the
difference; but the value of the team should be taken into account; for where
both were sold for the same price this must not be divided in two, but the loss
of value of both of them together must be considered, and not merely the
deterioration of the one which is blemished.
(14) Where a pair of match-horses is sold, it is stated in the Edict that if
there is cause for the return of one of them both should be returned; in which
instance the interest of the purchaser as well as that of the vendor should be
considered, since the animals are not separated. Likewise, where a team of
three horses, or one of four is sold, all of them should be returned. Where,
however, there are two pairs of mules, and one mule is unsound, only the pair
to which it belongs shall be returned, and not the others. But if they are not
divided into pairs, but four mules are merely sold for one price, there will be
the return of one mule, and not of all, as, where a number of horses are sold
for breeding purposes, we hold that if one of them should be unsound, it is not
necessary for all of them to be returned. We hold the same opinion where
several slaves are sold for one price, unless they cannot be separated; as, for
instance, where they are actors, or buffoons.
39. Paulus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I. Or brothers;
40. Ultpianus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book II.For these should not
be separated.
(1) Next, the AEdiles say, "That a dog, a hog, a small wild boar, a wolf, a
bear, a panther, a lion,"
41. Paulus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book II.
And, generally speaking, "Or any other animal likely to commit injury, whether
it be at large or tied, but incapable of being restrained so as not to cause
damage,"
42. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book II.
Cannot be kept in a place where people are constantly passing, and where the
said animal may injure anyone, or cause any damage. If these provisions should
be violated, and a freeman lose his life in consequence, two hundred solidi
shall be paid; and if a freeman should be injured, the party responsible shall
have judgment rendered against him for a sum which may seem in the wisdom and
justice of the judge to be proper; and where any other person or any property
is injured, the said party shall be compelled to pay double the amount of the
damage caused.
43. Paulus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
Most authorities say that an ox which strikes with its horns is vicious, just
as is the case with mules that kick. Horses, also, which are frightened without
any cause and run away, are also said to be vicious.
(1) A slave who takes refuge with a friend of his master, in order to obtain
his intercession with the latter, is not a fugitive; not even if he has the
intention of not returning home if he does not obtain pardon. He is not yet a
fugitive, for the reason that the term "flight" does not merely apply to design
but also to the act itself.
(2) Where a slave, through being instigated by another to leave his master,
takes to flight, he is a fugitive; even though he would not have run away if it
had not been for the advice of the person who persuaded him.
(3) If a slave of mine who was serving you in good faith runs away, he is a
fugitive, whether he knows that he belongs to me or is ignorant of the fact,
unless he did so with the intention of returning to me.
(4) A slave attempts suicide who does so on account of wickedness, bad habits,
or some crime which he has committed; but not where he takes such a step
because he is unable to endure bodily suffering.
(5) Where anyone purchases a slave, and is deprived of him by force, he can
recover fourfold damages on the ground of robbery, and he can afterwards return
the slave, and the vendor must refund the price which he received. Where,
however, he suffered injury through his slave, and has instituted proceedings
on that account, he cannot return him to the vendor, unless the purchaser
should bring an action against the party who has beaten the slave with a whip,
or subjected him to torture.
(6) A slave should sometimes be returned, even though we may have brought an
action for his appraisement, that is to say, the estimate of the excess of the
price above his true value. For if he is worthless, so that it is not to the
advantage of his master to have such a slave,
as, for instance, where he is subject to fits of rage, or is insane, even
though an action for his appraisement may have been instituted, it is,
nevertheless, the duty of the judge to cause the purchase-money to be repaid
after the slave has been returned.
(7) If anyone should cause the return of a slave with the intention of
defrauding his creditors, and would not have returned him unless he had
intended to defraud them; the vendor will be liable to the creditors for the
value of the slave.
(8) When a slave is pledged, he will remain bound even though he be returned;
just as where he, or the usufruct in him, has been disposed of, he cannot
lawfully be returned unless he is redeemed and restored free from the liability
contracted under the pledge.
(9) Where a slave is purchased under a condition, and proceedings with a view
to his return are instituted before the condition has been fulfilled, they will
be void, because the purchase is not yet complete, and cannot be set aside by
the decision of a judge; and therefore if an action on purchase or sale, or one
for the return of property is filed before the condition has been fulfilled,
suit can afterwards be brought a second time.
(10) In some instances even where an absolute sale has taken place, it remains
in abeyance on account of a condition of law; as for example, where a slave in
whom one party has the usufruct and the other the ownership, buys something;
for as long as it is uncertain out of whose property he pays the price, the
title to the property will be in suspense, and therefore neither of the parties
can bring an action for the return of the slave.
44. The Same, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book II.
The AEdiles, with great justice, refuse to permit a slave to be accessory to
property of less value than himself, in order to avoid fraud being committed
either against the Edict or against the Civil Law, and also, as Pedius says,
against the dignity of mankind; otherwise the same rule would apply as in the
other matters, since it would be ridiculous for a tract of land to be
considered accessory to a tunic. Anything, however, may be permitted to be
accessory to the sale of a slave, for very frequently the peculium is more
valuable than the slave himself, and sometimes a sub-slave, classed as an
accessory, is worth more than the principal slave who is sold.
(1) An action is granted under this Edict against the party who had the
greatest interest in the sale of the slave, because dealers in slaves generally
form partnerships, so that whatever they do is held to be transacted in common;
for it seemed just to the AEdiles that the actions which they established should
be brought either against the party who owned the greater share of the property
--- or at least who did not own less than the others --- in order that the buyer
might not be compelled to engage in litigation with many persons; although an
action on purchase can be brought against each individual partner in proportion
to his share; for this kind of men are much inclined to gain, as well as to the
commission of dishonorable acts.
(2) In an action for the return of property, or for its appraisement, a doubt
arises whether a party who has sold a slave belonging to another will be
liable, at the same time, on the ground of eviction, or because of unsoundness,
or on account of the flight of the slave. For it may be said that the purchaser
has no further interest where he has been deprived of the possession of the
slave by a better title, whether he is sound or a fugitive; but it is to the
interest of the purchaser that he should have been sound when he possessed him
on account of his services, and the obligation does not increase because of
what may have subsequently happened, for just as soon as the slave is
delivered, the stipulation relating to the interest of the purchaser becomes
operative.
45. Gaius, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
An action for the return of a slave has a twofold effect, for sometimes the
vendor will have judgment rendered against him for double damages, and
sometimes merely for simple damages. For if he refuses to refund either the
price of the slave or any accessories attaching to him, and will not release
him from the liability incurred on his account, he will be ordered to pay
double the amount of the price and the accessories. Where, however, he returns
the price and the accessories or releases the slave from the obligation
incurred for his benefit, judgment for simple damages should be rendered
against him.
46. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XVIII.
When you return a slave to me, you are not obliged to guarantee that he is not
liable for any thefts or damages, except where he has committed them by your
order, or by that of the party to whom you may have sold him.
47. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book XI.
If you manumit a slave whom you have purchased, Labeo says that you will
neither be granted an action to return him, nor one to recover the amount of
the excess of his value which you have paid; just as the right of action for
double damages is extinguished. Therefore the right of action founded on
something which has been represented or guaranteed will also be lost.
(1) The actions arising from the Edict of the AEdiles continue to exist even
after the death of the slave;
48. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XXIII.
Provided the slave dies without the fault of the purchaser, or of his family,
or of his agent.
(1) He who complains of unsoundness or disease in a slave that he has
purchased, and wishes to retain him until satisfaction is given him, should be
heard.
(2) The rights of the purchaser shall not be prejudiced where, having been
barred from bringing an action for the return of the slave within six months,
he desires to institute proceedings for the appraisement of his value within a
year.
(3) It is just that the Edict of the AEdiles should not apply to anyone who has
sold a slave in chains, for it is far more effective to do this than merely to
state that he has been in chains.
(4) In actions founded on the Edict of the AEdiles, it is no more than proper
that the vendor should be permitted to plead an exception if the purchaser was
aware that the slave was in the habit of running away, or had been in chains,
or had any other similar faults which would entitle the vendor to be released.
(5) The action founded on the Edict of the AEdiles will lie both in favor of an
heir and against him; but inquiry should, nevertheless, be made as to any acts
subsequently committed by the heirs, and as to whether they had a right to
institute such proceedings.
(6) These actions can be brought not only with reference to slaves, but also
concerning every kind of animals, so that they will lie against me, even if I
had only purchased the usufruct of a slave.
(7) When suit for the return of a slave because of his soundness is brought, it
is permitted to proceed and make allegations as to one defect, and if any other
should afterwards appear, a second action with reference to it can be
instituted.
(8) It is not customary, in the case of simple sales, to make use of the action
for the return of property.
49. Ulpiamis, Disputations, Book VIII.
There is no doubt that proceedings for the return of property can also be
brought in the case of the sale of a tract of land, as, for example, where land
is sold which is injurious to health; for it should be returned. And it is but
equitable to hold that the purchaser is not liable for the taxes at any time
after the return of the property.
50. Julianus, On Minicius, Book IV.
A slave with varicose veins is not sound.
51. Africanus, Questions, Book VIII.
Where one slave buys another who is diseased or unsound, and his master brings
an action on purchase, or one for the return of the slave; it should be
ascertained, not whether the master, but whether the slave was aware of these
defects, so that it makes no difference whether he purchased the slave to be
added to his peculium, or acquired him in the name of his master; or whether he
purchased any particular slave, or one in general, by the order of his master;
for then it becomes a question of good faith, whether the slave has not been
deceived by the party with whom he transacted the business; and, on the other
hand, whether the offence which the slave committed in making the contract
should prejudice his master. If, however, the slave purchased the sub-slave by
the order of his master, and the latter knew that he was unsound, the vendor
will not be liable.
(1) Where such a transaction is made with an agent, there is no doubt that if
the latter knew the slave to be diseased or unsound, he cannot bring an action
on this account; although he himself will, never-
theless, be liable to an action based on voluntary agency. Where, however, the
agent himself did not know that the slave was unsound, and purchased him by the
direction of his principal, who was aware of it; and he brings an action before
the return of the slave in the name of his principal, it is held that a valid
exception cannot be interposed against him.
52. Marcianus, Rules, Book IV.
If a slave should commit a theft against his master, it is not necessary to
state this at the time of the sale of the slave, for a return will not be
granted for this reason. But if he said that this slave was not a thief, he
will be liable on the ground of making such a representation and guarantee.
53. Javolenus, On the Last Works of Labeo, Book I.
Where a slave has tertian or quartan fever, or gout or epilepsy, he it not held
to be legally sound, even on days when he is free from these diseases.
54. Papinianus, Opinions, Book IV.
There is no ground for an action for the return of a slave where one has been
purchased for a good consideration, and runs away, if he had not done so
previously.
55. The Same, Opinions, Book XII.
Six available months from the time that proceedings should have been instituted
are granted in which to file an action for the return of a slave, and the power
to proceed will not be held to have existed where the party was ignorant that
he was in the habit of running away, and this fault had been concealed. Still,
the gross ignorance of the purchaser on this point must not be excused.
56. Paulus, Questions, Book I.
Latinus Largus: "I ask whether a slave can be returned to a surety of the
vendor." I answered that if the surety was taken with reference to everything
connected with the sale, Marcellus thinks that the slave can be returned to the
surety.
57. The Same, Questions, Book V.
Where one slave purchases another, and his master brings an action for his
return, the vendor is not obliged to pay him, unless he delivers to him
everything included in this action, the whole amount in fact, and not merely
what has reference to the peculium; for if the master brings an action on sale,
unless he pays the entire purchase-money, he will not accomplish anything.
(1) Where, however, a slave or a son makes a sale, an action for the return of
the slave will involve his peculium, and the ground for the return is also
included in the peculium. Nor does it concern us that the slave was not part of
the peculium before he was returned, for a
slave cannot belong to the peculium who is still the property of the purchaser,
but the ground for the return itself is considered to be part of the peculium.
Therefore, if a slave purchased for ten thousand sesterces is only worth five
thousand, we say that the latter sum belongs to the peculium. This is the case
if he owes his master nothing, or has not been deprived of the peculium. If,
however, he owes his master more, the result will be that he must surrender the
slave, and will not recover anything.
58. The Same, Opinions, Book V.
I ask, if a slave has fled from the purchaser, and it has been decided that
good cause for his return exists, whether the vendor should not pay the
appraised value of the property carried away by the slave, before the latter is
returned to him. Paulus answered that the vendor should be compelled not only
to pay the price of the slave, but also the appraised value of what was stolen
by him, unless he is ready to deliver up the slave by way of reparation for the
property taken.
(1) I also ask if the vendor refuses to pay the appraised value of the property
and the purchase-money, whether the slave should be retained, and an action on
the peculium granted, or whether double the price of the slave sought to be
returned should be demanded on the ground of a stipulation. Paulus answered
that an action will lie for the recovery of the price of the slave, and also
for double his value on account of the stipulation. An opinion has already been
given with reference to the property stolen by the slave.
(2) I purchased a slave under the stipulation of double his value if he was
returned, and he then ran away with some of my property. Having afterwards been
found, and interrogated in the presence of respectable men as to whether he had
previously run away from the house of the vendor, he answered that he had. I
ask whether this answer of the slave is entitled to consideration. Paulus
replied that if other proofs of his former flight are not lacking, then the
answer of the slave should be believed.
59. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXIV.
Where a slave is sold in such a condition that he should be returned, it is
unjust that the vendor should receive his price.
(1) Where anyone purchases two slaves for one price, and one of them is in such
a condition that he ought to be returned, and the vendor then brings an action
for the entire amount, an exception should be filed by way of defence. Where,
however, suit is brought for a portion of the price, the better opinion is that
an exception will not be a bar, unless the facts are such that both slaves
should be returned on account of the unsoundness of one of them.
60. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LXIX.
After the return of the slave has been made, everything should be placed in its
former condition just as if there had been no sale.
61. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXX.
Whenever a servitude is in question, and the vendor is defeated, he should
refund to the purchaser the amount of the excess paid by the latter, if he was
aware that the said servitude had been imposed upon the property.
62. Modestinus, Differences, Book VIII.
It must be held that the Edict of the Curule AEdiles has no reference to
property which is donated. For why should the donor bind himself to take back
anything when no price is involved in the transaction? But what if the property
has been improved by the party to whom it was given? Can the donor be sued for
the value of the improvements? It must be said that this is by no means the
case, for the donor should not suffer a penalty on account of his liberality.
Therefore, where anything is given away, it will not be necessary for those
guarantees to be given which the AEdiles require where property is sold. It is
clear that the donor ought to bind himself (and he usually does so) with
reference to fraud, in order that he may not, with fraudulent intent, revoke
what he bestowed by way of kindness.
63. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book I.
It should be noted that this Edict has reference solely to sales, not only
those of slaves, but also those of every other kind of property. It seems
strange that nothing was stated with reference to leases. The reason given for
this is that they were never included in the jurisdiction of the AEdiles, or
because leases and sales are not contracted under the same circumstances.
64. Pomponius, Epistles, Book XVII.
Labeo says that if you purchase several slaves for one price, and you wish to
bring an action with reference to one of them, an appraisement of all the
slaves should be made, just as is done in appraising land when suit is brought
because of the loss of a portion of said land by
eviction.
(1) He also says that if you sold several slaves for one price, and guaranteed
them to be sound, and only a part of them are sound, an action can properly be
brought with reference to all, because of the representation and guarantee.
(2) He also says that a beast of burden can wander away and escape, but
proceedings cannot be instituted on the ground that it is a wanderer or a
fugitive.
65. Venuleius, Actions, Book V.
It is a mental rather than a physical defect, for a slave to wish to constantly
be present at exhibitions, or to carefully examine paintings, or even to be
untruthful, or to have similar faults.
(1) Whenever a chronic disease is mentioned, Cassius says this means one which
is harmful. The word, however, should be under-
stood to signify an affection which is constant, and not ended by time. A
chronic disease is held to be one which attacks a man after his birth, for the
word chronic means continuous.
(2) A slave can be styled experienced, or a novice. Cौlius says that an
experienced slave should be valued, not on account of the time he has been in
servitude, but because of his ability and qualifications; for where anyone, at
a sale, purchases a slave who is a novice and employs him in some service, he
is immediately included in the number of those who are experienced, since
inexperience is understood to be dependent, not upon the undeveloped state of
the mind, but upon the condition of servitude. It makes no difference whether
he understands Latin or not, for a slave is not held to be experienced merely
because he happens to be learned in the liberal arts and sciences.
TITLE II.
CONCERNING EVICTIONS, AND THE STIPULATION FOR DOUBLE DAMAGES.
1. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXVIII.
Where a purchaser loses the entire property which he bought or only a part of
it, on account of a better title, he has recourse to the vendor. Where he loses
a portion of it, or an undivided part of land, he has recourse for the amount
which he has lost. If, however, he loses a certain portion of the tract, and
not an undivided share of the same, he is entitled to recourse according to the
quality of the land of which he has been deprived. But what if he should be
deprived of either the best, or the worst part of the land? The quality of the
land should be ascertained, and he will be entitled to recourse in proportion
to its value.
2. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book V.
If double damages are not promised, and an action is brought on the ground of
eviction; judgment for double damages should be rendered against the defendant.
3. The Same, On Sabinus, Book X.
In the sale of a slave, his peculium is always understood to be reserved. Where
a slave who was sold took away with him a certain portion of his peculium, and
an action of theft is brought against the purchaser on this account, the latter
cannot have recourse to the vendor for double damages on the ground of a
stipulation, because the vendor, at the time of the sale, should guarantee the
slave to be free from liability for theft, or damage. This right of action,
however, only originates after the sale has taken place.
4. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.
The question arises whether he who sold the slave should give a surety against
eviction, who is commonly called a second surety. It has been settled that he
need not do so, unless it has been agreed upon.
(1) Where a guardian makes a sale in the name of a minor, and eviction follows,
Papinianus says in the Third Book of Opinions that an equitable action will be
granted against him for whose benefit the guardianship is being administered.
He adds, however, that this only applies to what was included in his property
at the time. Let us see whether the ward will be liable for the entire amount
if the guardian should not be solvent. This I think to be the better opinion,
for a contract made with a guardian is not void.
5. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXIII.
The vendor of a slave stated that his peculium was an accessory. If a sub-slave
was taken away by eviction, Labeo says that the vendor will not be liable on
this account, for if the slave did not form part of the peculium he would not
constitute an accessory, but if he did, the purchaser sustained an injury
through the decision of the judge; but the case is different if the vendor had
expressly stated that the slave was an accessory, for, in this instance, he
would be obliged to guarantee that the slave borrowed part of the peculium.
6. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book X.
Where a tract of land is sold, it is necessary to furnish security against
eviction, according to the custom of that part of the country where the
transaction took place.
7. Julianus, Digest, Book XIII.
Where a party buys from a ward a slave who was substituted for him, he can
bring an action on purchase against the substitute, as well as one under the
stipulation on the ground of eviction; but he will be entitled to neither of
these actions against the ward himself.
8. The Same, Digest, Book XV.
The vendor of a slave must guarantee the purchaser to the amount of the
interest that the latter had that the slave should belong to the vendor.
Wherefore, if the purchaser should lose, by eviction, the offspring of a female
slave or an estate which the slave had entered upon by his order, he can bring
an action on purchase. And just as the vendor is bound to deliver to him the
slave which he sold him, so he is bound to make good to the purchaser
everything that he could have acquired through the slave, if he had not been
deprived of him.
9. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LXXVI.
If you should sell me a slave belonging to Titius, and Titius should afterwards
appoint me his heir; Sabinus says that, in case of eviction, the right of
action is lost, since the slave cannot be taken from me, but that recourse must
be had to an action on purchase.
10. Celsus, Digest, Book XXVII.
If anyone should sell and transfer to me a right of way which he has in common
with another, as if he were the sole owner of the
same, he will be liable to me on the ground of eviction, if the other party
refuses to transfer to me his right.
11. Paulus, Opinions, Book VI.
Lucius Titius bought lands in Germany, beyond the Rhine, and paid a portion of
the purchase-money. When suit was brought against the heir of the purchaser for
the remainder, the latter set up a counterclaim alleging that these possessions
had been partially sold by order of the Emperor, and partly distributed as
rewards among veteran soldiers. I ask whether this risk must be assumed by the
vendor? Paulus answered that future cases of eviction, which occur after the
sale has been contracted, do not affect the vendor; and, therefore, according
to the facts stated, suit could be brought for the remainder of the price of
the land.
(1) The vendor cannot be sued for either double or simple damages, on account
of such offences as are usually punished by public prosecution, where the
following words are inserted in a stipulation, namely: "The slave in question
is free from liability for damage committed."
12. Scौvola, Opinions, Book II.
A certain individual having been appointed heir to half an estate sold all the
land belonging to the same, and his co-heirs accepted the price. The land
having been lost by eviction, I ask whether the coheirs will be liable to an
action on purchase. I answer that if the coheirs were present, and did not
dissent, each one of them was held to have sold his share.
13. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book V.
Proculus very justly held that where part of a tract of land is lost by
eviction, an estimate of its quality should be made at the time when it was
sold, and not when the purchaser was deprived of it;
14. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVIII.
And that half of the amount of the price should not merely be taken into
consideration.
15. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book V.
If, however, the land subsequently received any accession by way of alluvial
deposit, the time when this took place should be taken into account.
(1) Where an usufruct is lost by eviction, an estimate should be made of the
value of the crops.
(2) Where, however, a slave is lost to the purchaser by eviction, the extent to
which the land is diminished in value on this account must be estimated in
court.
16. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book IX.
Where the property sold has been recovered by anyone having a better title, an
action on purchase can be brought with reference to
anything which has been added to it, just as where those things which are
expressly stated to be accessories to land which is purchased must simply be
made good by the vendor if they are lost by eviction.
(1) A stipulation for double damages is said to be operative at the time the
property is restored to the claimant; or where he has judgment rendered against
him for the value of the property; or when the possessor, having been sued by
the purchaser, is released.
(2) Where a slave, on account of whom we have stipulated for the payment of
double damages is lost by us because of his being a fugitive, or not being
sound; the question arises can we, nevertheless, institute proceedings?
Proculus says that it should be considered whether a difference does not exist
where he was not mine at the time eviction took place, and where he had become
mine at that time; for, in the case where he became my property, I immediately
acquired an interest in the amount to which he was deteriorated, for this
reason; and I at once acquired a right of action on the stipulation, which I
cannot lose either by eviction, or by the death, manumission, or flight of the
slave, or for any other similar reason. But if he had not become part of my
property, I am none the poorer, because the slave is a fugitive; since he was
not included in my estate.
If, however, I stipulated that he was sound, and not accustomed to wander
about, my interest only has reference to the present use, although it may be
undetermined; just as if it was unknown how long I should have him, and whether
anyone would recover him by eviction either from me, or from the person to whom
I sold him and to whom I likewise gave a guarantee.
The conclusion of Proculus is that I could only be sued on the stipulation
after it had become operative, to the extent of my interest that the said slave
should not be in the habit of running away.
17. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXIX.
No one doubts that a vendor who attempts to recover property which he himself
has sold can be barred by an exception on the ground of fraud, even though he
may have obtained ownership of it under another title; for he is dishonorably
attempting to obtain property which has been disposed of by him.
Moreover, the vendor should determine whether he prefers to retain the property
by arresting the proceedings by means of an exception; or, if he has been
deprived of the property, bring an action for double damages under the
stipulation.
18. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book V.
Even though an exception may not have been pleaded, or if, having been
successfully opposed, the purchaser is, nevertheless, evicted; the vendor can
still be sued for double damages under the stipulation, for an action on
purchase can be brought against him.
19. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXIX.
Where, however, no stipulation was entered into, we hold the same opinion with
reference to an action on purchase.
(1) Where a freeman, who was serving Titius in good faith as a slave, is sold
to me, and Titius makes him his heir, as if he was free, and he joins issue
with me on this account; I will be entitled to hold him liable as the heir of
Titius.
20. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book X.
I encumbered a tract of land belonging to me, and afterwards sold it to you
under the condition that you would not encumber it. If I should afterwards
purchase the said land from you, and you execute a bond to me providing against
eviction, it should be stated in the bond that the land was encumbered on my
account, because if this is not done, and I bring an action against you on this
ground I can be barred by an exception based on fraud.
21. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXIX.
Where a slave, who has been sold, dies before he is recovered by someone having
a better title, the stipulation does not become operative, because no one
recovered him, and what occurred is but the fate of mankind. Still, if any
fraud existed, the purchaser can bring an action on that ground.
(1) Hence Julianus very properly lays down in the Forty-third Book that the
stipulation for double damages becomes operative whenever the property is lost
in such a way that the purchaser will not be entitled to it on account of the
eviction itself.
(2) Therefore, he says where a controversy arises with reference to the
ownership of a slave, and the purchaser appoints the vendor his agent, and the
latter having been defeated, becomes liable for damages; the stipulation for
double the amount does not become operative, because the vendor, who is at the
same time an agent of the purchaser, has no right of action on mandate to
enable him to recover the amount of the damages from the purchaser. Hence,
since the purchaser has lost neither property nor money, there is no necessity
for the stipulation to be enforced; although, if he had been defeated after
issue had been joined, and had paid the damages assessed, it is held that the
stipulation would become operative; and this Julianus himself stated in the
same book, for the buyer is not considered to have in his possession a slave of
whom he would have been deprived by his adversary if he had not paid the price.
For the buyer acquires the right to the slave rather through the second
purchase, that is to say, through the payment of his estimated value in court,
than by the first transaction.
Julianus also says in the same book, that if, where issue has been joined in a
case, and the slave escapes through the negligence of the possessor, the latter
should have judgment rendered against him; but he cannot immediately have
recourse to the vendor, and must proceed under the stipulation for double
damages, because, in the meantime, he was not entitled to the slave through
having security against eviction, but on account of his flight. It is evident,
he says, that when he obtained possession of the fugitive, the stipulation
became operative. For if the slave had escaped without the fault of the
possessor, he
would then be released, if security was given, and the stipulation would not
become operative, unless he should restore the slave after he had been caught.
Therefore, where he tenders the amount of damages, this will be sufficient to
enable him to hold the slave, but where he gives security, this cannot be done
before he returns him.
22. Pomponius, On Plautius, Book I.
Where a guardian pays damages assessed on account of property purchased for his
ward, not out of the money belonging to the latter, but out of his own
property; a stipulation against eviction becomes operative in favor of the ward
as against the vendor.
(1) Where a woman takes security against eviction from a tract of land which
she purchased, and gives the same land by way of dowry, and someone afterwards
deprives her husband of it by means of an action; the woman can immediately
proceed against the surety on the ground of purchase, as having reduced the
amount of her dowry, or rendered it worthless; provided the husband tendered to
the claimant the value of the said property.
23. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXIX.
Where, however, the land is lost by eviction after the death of the woman,
recourse must be had to the stipulation for double damages, because the husband
can bring an action based on the promise of the dowry, against the heirs of the
woman, and they themselves can proceed on the ground of the stipulation.
24. Africanus, Questions, Book VI.
Still, we cannot say that the result will be that the stipulation becomes
operative if the woman is about to marry the true owner of the slave, and gives
him as dowry, even though she will, in this instance, not have any dowry;
since, indeed, while it is true that she has no right to the slave, yet it is
not a fact that she has been deprived of him by a judicial proceeding; and she
will, nevertheless, be entitled to an action on purchase against the vendor.
25. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXIX.
If you manumit a slave on whose account you have stipulated for double damages,
you can recover nothing on account of the stipulation; because you are not
deprived of anything to which you are entitled, since you yourself have
voluntarily relinquished it.
26. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book V.
The purchaser will be entitled to an action on sale, on the ground that he did
not make him his freedman, if the vendor was aware that he was selling a slave
belonging to another. Where, however, the purchaser was compelled to manumit
the slave on account of a trust, he will be entitled to an action on purchase.
27. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XL
We adopt the rule that where exceptions are interposed against the purchaser,
and they prevail, the vendor will not be liable; but where
they have reference to the act of the vendor, the contrary rule applies. For it
is certain that the purchaser will have no right to an action either on
purchase, or under the stipulation for double, or even simple damages, where an
exception based on his own act is successfully pleaded.
28. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXXI.
But if exceptions based on the acts of both vendor and purchaser are pleaded,
it is a matter of importance to ascertain on account of which exception the
judge will render his decision, and hence whether the stipulation is operative
or not.
29. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XI.
If you should sell me property belonging to another, and I should repurchase it
from the true owner; Celsus, the son, says that the opinion of Nerva is not
correct; namely, that you, in bringing an action on sale, can recover the price
from me; because I was, as it were, entitled to the property, since it is not
agreeable to good faith that I should hold property under a title belonging to
someone else.
(1) Where a stipulator for double damages instead of being the possessor
becomes the claimant and loses his case, if he had been in possession of the
property he could have retained it, but he cannot legally bring suit to recover
it, as the promisor of double damages will be secure by operation of law, or he
can undoubtedly protect himself by an exception on the ground of fraud. This,
however, is the case only where possession was lost through the negligence, or
with the consent of the stipulator for double damages.
(2) The vendor can be notified to appear at any time whatsoever when the matter
is brought up in court, because a certain date is not fixed by this
stipulation; provided, however, this is not done before the time that judgment
is rendered.
30. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XIX.
Where he who stipulated with the purchaser that the slave was free from
liability for theft or damages, and he from whom the slave stole the property
becomes the heir of the purchaser, he will immediately be entitled to an action
under the stipulation, just as if he himself had made good the amount of a
theft committed against someone else.
31. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLII.
Where anyone makes a promise to the stipulating party "That the slave is sound,
is not a thief, is not a violator of graves, etc.," the stipulation seems to
some authorities to be void, because if the slave is of this character what is
promised is impossible, and if he is not, the promise is without effect.
I think that the following stipulation is more correct, namely: "That the slave
is not a thief, is not a violator of graves, and is sound," and this is in
conformity with law, for it contains what it is for the interest of the
purchaser of the slave to have and not to have. But if a guaran-
tee is added to any of these statements the stipulation will be still more
valid; otherwise the stipulation introduced by the AEdiles will be void, because
no rational man would approve of it.
32. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XLVI.
For the reason that it is held that, where several matters are set forth in one
stipulation, there are several stipulations; let us see whether this applies to
one calling for double damages, for example, where anyone stipulates that the
slave is not in the habit of running away, and is not a wanderer, and the other
things which are mentioned in the Edict of the Curule AEdiles; is there one
stipulation, or several, in this instance? It is reasonable to hold that there
are several.
(1) Hence what Julianus states in the Fifteenth Book of the Digest is correct.
For he says that, where a purchaser brings an action for the depreciation in
value of a slave because he was in the habit of running away, and then brings
another on account of some disease with which he was afflicted; care must be
taken to prevent the purchaser from obtaining a profit, and recovering damages
twice for the same defect.
Let us suppose that a slave was purchased for ten aurei, and that the buyer
could have acquired him for at least two less, if he had only known that he was
in the habit of running away; and, after recovering this sum because of said
habit, he afterwards discovers that he is not sound, and that he could have
purchased him for two aurei less, if he had been aware that he was diseased. He
should, therefore, again recover two aurei, for if he had brought suit at the
same time on both causes of action, he could have recovered four, since he
could have purchased the slave who was not sound, and who was in the habit of
running away, for only six aurei. In accordance to principle, he can proceed
frequently under the stipulation, for he does not do so merely on account of
one stipulation, but on account of several.
33. The Same, On Sabinus, Book LI.
If I purchase a slave and sell him, and afterwards have judgment rendered
against me in favor of the purchaser, because I could not deliver the slave on
account of eviction, the stipulation becomes operative.
34. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XXVII.
If you buy a female slave on condition that she shall not be prostituted, and
if she is she shall become free, and you violate the condition of the sale, the
slave will obtain her freedom, and you will be in the same position as if you
had manumitted her, and therefore you will have no recourse against the vendor.
(1) Where proceedings have been instituted against me for the partition of
property in a slave, and the latter is adjudged to my adversary for the reason
that he proved that the said slave was held in common, I will be entitled to an
action for double damages under
the stipulation, because it makes no difference by what kind of a judgment
eviction is obtained, if I have no right to the property.
(2) A stipulation for double damages does not merely include eviction where
anyone claims and recovers the ownership of property, but also applies where
proceedings are instituted under the Servian Action.
35. Paulus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book II.
Property is held to have been obtained by a creditor through eviction, where
the expectation of holding it has been almost lost by the purchaser. Therefore,
where eviction took place under the Servian Action, the stipulation in fact
becomes operative; but as, where the money is paid by the debtor, the purchaser
can hold the slave when the pledge is released, if the vendor is sued, he can
avail himself of an exception on the ground of bad faith.
36. The Same, On the Edict, Book XXIX.
Where a ship or a house has been purchased, the stones of the foundation and
the different planks are not understood to have been separately bought; and
therefore the vendor will not be liable on the ground of eviction, as he would
be in case a portion of the ship or of the house had been recovered through
proof of a better title.
37. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.
Double the amount of the price must be promised by the vendor to the purchaser,
unless some other arrangement is made, still, it is not necessary for him to
give security, unless a special agreement is entered into to that effect, but
the vendor will only be liable.
(1) Moreover, where he stated that double damages must be promised, it should
be understood that this does not apply to every kind of transaction, but only
to such where the articles sold are of great value; as, for instance, jewels,
or precious ornaments, or silken garments, or anything else which is not sold
at a low price. By the Curule Edict the vendor is also ordered to furnish
security in the case of the sale of a slave.
(2) Where the buyer through mistake stipulates for simple instead of double
damages, and he is deprived of the property by eviction, Neratius says that he
can recover the deficiency in the stipulation by means of an action on
purchase, provided the buyer does everything required by the stipulation. For
if he does not do so, he can, only in an action on purchase, compel the vendor
to promise him what was omitted in the stipulation in the first place.
38. The Same, Disputations, Book II.
Where a creditor has sold a pledge it may be considered whether, in case of
eviction, the vendor can in a suit based on the sale, be compelled to assign
the right of action which he has against the debtor. He is, however, entitled
to a counter-action on pledge, and the better opinion is that he must make the
assignment, for does it not seem more just to him that the purchaser should at
least obtain this advantage, which he can do without causing any expense to the
creditor?
39. Julianus, Digest, Book LVII.
A minor under twenty-five years of age sold a tract of land to Titius, and
Titius sold it to Seius. The minor alleged that he had been overreached in the
sale, and obtained a judicial inquiry, not only against Titius, but against
Seius as well. Seius asked the Prौtor to grant him an equitable action on the
stipulation, against Titius, on account of the eviction. I thought it should be
granted, and gave it as my opinion that Seius only demanded what was proper,
for if the land should be taken away from him by a decision of the Prौtor, it
would be but just for restitution to be given him in case of eviction by the
same Prौtor.
(1) If your slave should buy another, and then sell him to Titius, after
promising double his value in case of eviction, and you also should stipulate
with the vendor of the slave, and Titius should claim the slave, and having
brought suit is defeated on the ground that your slave could not transfer
property in another slave without your consent, Titius would be entitled to the
Publician Action, and on this account a stipulation for double damages would
not become operative as far as he was concerned. Wherefore, if you bring suit
under the stipulation, you can be barred by an exception, on the ground of bad
faith, interposed by your vendor.
The case would be different, however, if the said slave purchased another, and,
after stipulating for double damages, sold him; for if the purchaser was
deprived of him by eviction, the owner will be entitled to an action against
the vendor to recover the entire sum, but he will only have a right of action
against the purchaser to the extent of the peculium.Moreover, the purchaser
should notify the slave and not his master, of the eviction, for where he is
deprived of the slave through a better title, he can lawfully bring an action
on the peculium. If, however, the slave should die, then his master must be
notified.
(2) If you purchase two-thirds of a tract of land from me, and one-third from
Titius, and then someone claims half of the land from you, if the half which is
claimed from you is included in the two-thirds which you have received from me,
Titius will not be liable. Where, however, the claim is for the third which
Titius has sold you, and the sixth is included in the two-thirds which you have
received from me, Titius will be liable to you for a third, and I for a sixth,
in case of eviction.
(3) A father, aware of his responsibility, sold his son whom he had under his
control to a purchaser who was ignorant of the fact, and the question arose
whether he was liable in case of eviction. The answer was where anyone
knowingly or ignorantly sells a freeman as a slave, he is liable in case of
eviction. Hence the father who sold his son as a slave is liable on the ground
of eviction.
(4) Where a party sells and delivers a slave who is to become free under some
condition, and does not state that this is the case, he will be liable in case
of eviction, without reference to lapse of time.
(5) Where anyone sells and delivers a slave, and states that the usufruct in
him belongs to Seius, while, in fact, it belongs to Sempronius, and Sempronius
claims the usufruct; he will be liable just as if in delivering the property he
had stated that he was not liable to Seius on account of the usufruct, and if
the usufruct actually should belong to Seius, but was bequeathed in such a way
that when it ceased to belong to him, it would become the property of
Sempronius, and Sempronius should sue for it, he will be liable; but if Seius
should bring the action he could legally escape responsibility.
40. The Same, Digest, Book LVIII.
Where a party who has taken security from me against eviction bequeaths the
land to me as heir, the sureties will be immediately released, because even
though he to whom it was bequeathed has to a certain extent been evicted,
still, no action against the sureties will lie.
41. Paulus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book II.
Where I sold a slave and promised double his value to the purchaser in case of
eviction, and he had already bound himself to me by the same stipulation; and I
afterwards become his heir, and the slave is lost through a superior title, the
stipulation in no respect becomes operative. I am not held to have been
deprived of him by eviction, since I sold him, nor was he evicted from the
party to whom I made the guarantee, since I could, with very little propriety,
be said to be liable to pay myself double damages.
(1) Again, if the purchaser should become the heir of the owner of the slave,
as the slave cannot be evicted from him, nor can he be held to evict him from
himself, the stipulation for double the amount of his value will not become
operative. Therefore, in these cases an action on sale should be brought.
(2) Where anyone purchases a tract of land, and takes security against
eviction, and sells the said land to a purchaser who becomes his heir; or, on
the other hand, the purchaser becomes the heir of the vendor, in case the land
is lost by eviction, the question arises whether suit can be brought against
the sureties. I think that, in either case, the sureties will be liable, since
when a debtor becomes the heir of his creditor, a kind of an account is opened
between the heir and the estate, and the estate is understood to have become
larger for the debtor, since the money which was owing to the estate has been
paid and the property of the heir is diminished to that extent.
On the other hand, when a creditor becomes the heir of his debtor, the assets
of the estate are held to be diminished, just as if the estate itself had paid
the creditor. Therefore, whether he who had taken security against eviction
himself made the sale to the purchaser, or whether the latter becomes the heir
of the vendor, the sureties will be liable; and if the estates of the vendor
and the purchaser should pass into the hands of the same person, he can bring
an action against the sureties.
42. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LIII.
Where a female slave, who is pregnant, is sold and delivered, and her offspring
is evicted, the vendor cannot be sued on the ground of eviction because the
offspring was sold.
43. Julianus, Digest, Book LVIII.
The purchaser of a cow, whose calf born after the sale was evicted, cannot
bring an action for double damages under the stipulation, because neither the
property itself, nor the usufruct in the same, was evicted; for where we say
that a calf is the fruit of the cow, we mean, not the right, but the thing
itself, just as we rightly designate grain and wine as the fruit of land, since
it is settled that these things are not properly called usufruct.
44. Alfenus, Epitomes of the Digest by Paulus, Book II.
It is held that a boat is no part of a ship and has no connection with it, for
a boat is itself a little vessel; but everything which is attached to a ship,
as, for instance, the rudder, the mast, the yards and the sails, are, as it
were, the members of the ship.
45. The Same, Epitomes of the Digest by Paulus, Book IV.
Where a person sold and delivered a tract of land containing a hundred jugera,
he showed a tract of much greater extent to the purchaser, if the latter
should, in consequence, be evicted from a part of the land, the vendor will be
obliged to make good the amount in proportion to the quality of the soil; even
though the remaining portion may include a hundred jugera.
46. Africanus, Questions, Book VI.
You sold me a tract of land the usufruct of which belonged to Attius, but you
did not mention that he was entitled to the usufruct. I sold the said tract to
Mौvius, after having reserved the usufruct. Attius was deprived of his civil
rights, and it was held that the usufruct reverted to the property, for it
could not vest in me at a time when it belonged to someone else. I could,
however, bring suit against you, as vendor, on the ground of eviction, because
it is just that I should be in the position in which I had a right to be, if
the usufruct was then separated from the land.
(1) If you should grant me a right of way through the premises of another, it
is held that you are liable in case of eviction; for wherever a right of way is
granted through property belonging to the party who gives it, or whether it is
granted through the land of another, he assumes liability for eviction.
(2) If I should sell you Stichus, and state that he is to be free on a certain
condition, and that his manumission was dependent on the arrival of a ship from
Asia, while the condition really was that if Titius should become consul he
should be manumitted; the question arises if the ship should first come from
Asia, and Titius should afterwards
become consul, and the ownership of the slave should be lost through his
obtaining his freedom; would I be liable on the ground of eviction? The answer
was that I would not be liable, because the purchaser was guilty of bad faith,
as the condition was fulfilled before he lost the property by eviction.
(3) Moreover, if I stated that a slave would be free after two years, while, in
fact, he ought to become free at the end of a year, and after the lapse of two
years he obtains his freedom; or if I should say that he was entitled to his
freedom on the payment of five aurei, while, in reality, he had been ordered to
pay ten, and, the ten having been paid, he gains his freedom; the better
opinion is that in these instances I will not be liable.
47. The Same, Questions, Book VIII.
If I purchase two slaves from you, each for five aurei, and one of them is
evicted, there is no doubt that I can lawfully proceed against you in an action
of purchase, on the ground of eviction, even though the remaining slave is
worth ten aurei; nor does it make any difference whether I purchase them
separately, or both at once.
48. Neratius, Parchments, Book VI.
Where a tract of land is bought as being absolutely unincumbered, and the
purchaser obtains anything from the vendor on account of some servitude to
which the land was subject, and afterwards the entire tract is evicted, the
vendor should refund the amount remaining from the double damages, on account
of said eviction. For, if we do not observe this rule, the vendor can recover
more than double the sum paid for the land, in case of eviction; in the first
place, on account of certain servitudes, and afterwards on the ground of
ownership.
49. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book VII.
Where an usufruct is demanded from the purchaser, he ought to notify the vendor
of it; just as he should do from whom a portion of the property is sought to be
recovered.
50. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXV.
Where pledges are sold by officers of the Prौtor, in consequence of
extraordinary judgments, no one has ever said that an action should be granted
against them on the ground of eviction. If, however, they fraudulently
permitted the property to be sold for an insignificant sum, then an action will
be granted against them in favor of the owner of the property, on the ground of
fraud.
51. The Same, On the Edict, Book LXXX.
Where the purchaser of property loses his case through the ignorance or mistake
of the judge, we deny that the vendor shall suffer the loss, as what difference
does it make whether the property was lost through the baseness or folly of the
judge? For the vendor should not suffer the injury done to the purchaser.
(1) If Titius should sell Stichus, who was to be free after his death, and
Stichus obtains his freedom in consequence, will a stipulation made with
reference to eviction be valid? Julianus says that the stipulation becomes
operative, and even if the purchaser was unable in this instance to notify
Titius of the eviction, he can still notify his
heir.
(2) Where anyone sells a tract of land, and the vendor himself is buried there
by his heir, with the consent of the purchaser, an action on eviction cannot be
brought; for under these circumstances the purchaser will lose the property.
(3) It is not strange, however, that, where a slave is evicted, the heir should
be liable on account of the eviction, although the deceased may not have been
called to account in this way; for, in some instances, a greater obligation
will arise either against or in favor of the heir than would have affected the
deceased; as, for example, where a slave was appointed heir after the death of
the purchaser, and entered upon the estate by order of the heir of the latter,
for he must surrender the estate in an action on purchase, although a prौtorian
action could only have been brought against the deceased in order to compel the
slave to be delivered.
(4) Where several parties are liable to me for the entire amount in case of
eviction, and then, after eviction has taken place, I proceed against one of
them, Labeo says that, if I sue the others, I should be barred by an exception.
52. The Same, On the Edict, Book LXXXI.
It must be remembered that where a stipulation for double damages has been
entered into, it makes no difference whether it can become operative on account
of the sale, or because of any other transaction.
53. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LXXVII.
If any portion of land which has been transferred should be evicted, and each
jugerum of the same has been sold for a certain price, then whatever has been
evicted should be made good, not with reference to its quality, but in
proportion to the amount for which it was sold, even if the parts which have
been evicted are better than the remainder.
(1) If when the purchaser could have notified the vendor, he did not do so, and
he should be defeated in court because he did not obtain information which he
required, he will be held to have been guilty of bad faith on this account, and
he cannot proceed under the stipulation.
54. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XXVII.
Where anyone sells property belonging to another after title by prescription or
usucaption has been acquired through lapse of time, he ceases to be liable to
the purchaser for eviction.
(1) If an heir should sell a slave who was ordered to be free under the
condition of paying a certain sum of money, and he states that the amount
mentioned in the condition is greater than he was directed to pay, he will be
liable to an action on purchase, provided the condition
is such that it would have passed to the purchaser, that is to say, if the
slave was directed to pay the heir; for if he was directed to pay anyone else,
even though he may have stated the amount of money correctly, still, if he did
not notify the purchaser that he was directed to make payment to another, he
will be liable on the ground of eviction.
55. Ulpianus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book II.
Where judgment was rendered against a purchaser because he failed to appear,
the stipulation does not become operative, and he is held to have been defeated
rather on account of his absence, than because he had a bad case. But what if
he against whom judgment was rendered was not present at the trial, but another
party was present and conducted his case? What shall we decide? For example,
where issue has been joined with a ward who was granted authority by his
guardian, but the ward being absent, the guardian conducted the suit, . and
judgment was rendered against him; why should we not in this instance hold that
the stipulation was operative, for it is evident that the case was tried? It is
sufficient if the case was tried by the party who had the right to do so.
(1) The vendor should be notified if he is present, but if he is absent, or if,
being present, he does something to prevent his being notified, the stipulation
will become operative.
56. Paulus, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book II.
Where it was stated to the vendor that he must bind himself to pay either
simple, triple, or quadruple damages, he can be sued in an action on purchase
without reference to lapse of time; for he who pays double damages is not
compelled to give security, as is generally supposed, but the mere promise is
sufficient, unless something else should be agreed upon.
(1) If I submit a question to arbitration, and an award is rendered against me,
an action on the ground of eviction should not be granted me against the
vendor, for I have not acted from necessity.
(2) Where a slave is sold under a stipulation for double damages, if he should
be evicted, an addition with reference to the eviction of a share of said slave
will be necessary, for a slave cannot be held to be evicted where only a share
in him is involved.
(3) If the purchaser was able to acquire title by usucaption and does not do
so, he is considered to have done this through his own fault, and hence, if the
slave is evicted, the vendor will not be liable.
(4) If notice is given to the agent of the promisor (and the latter is present
at the time), and has bound himself with reference to eviction, and is not
ignorant of the fact, the promisor will still be liable.
(5) He also will be liable who took measures to avoid being notified.
(6) Where, however, the purchaser was not able to ascertain the whereabouts of
the vendor, although the latter did nothing to conceal himself, the stipulation
will, nevertheless, become operative.
(7) Trebatius says that it has been established as equitable that, in case of a
stipulation for double damages, a ward can be notified without the authority of
his guardian, if the latter does not appear.
57. Gaius, On the Edict of the Curule AEdiles, Book II.
A purchaser is held to have a right to possession of the property where the
party who deprived him of the same by eviction dies without leaving a
successor, before the property is taken away or removed, provided it does not
belong to the Treasury, or is not liable to be sold by private creditors; for
then the purchaser would not be entitled to any action under the stipulation,
because he has a right to hold the property.
(1) Since this is the case, let us see whether it must also be held that an
action does not arise on account of the stipulation, where the property was
donated or bequeathed to the purchaser by the party who defeated him. This is
certainly the case where he donated or bequeathed the property before he
removed it; otherwise, when the stipulation has once become operative it cannot
be annulled.
58. Javolenus, On Plautius, Book I.
An heir delivered a slave who was not expressly bequeathed, and gave a
guarantee against fraud and the slave was afterwards evicted. The legatee could
bring an action on the will against the heir, even though the latter was
ignorant that the slave was the property of another.
59. Pomponius, On Plautius, Book II.
Where property which I purchased from Titius is bequeathed by me, and the
legatee is sued by the owner of the same, he cannot notify my vendor of the
eviction, unless the rights of action should be assigned to him, or where he
has the property secured by hypothecation.
60. Javolenus, On Plautius, Book II.
Where it is not stated at the time of the sale to what extent the vendor should
be liable in case of eviction, he will not be liable on this ground for more
than simple damages, and for the amount of the interest of the purchaser
dependent upon the nature of the action of sale.
61. Marcellus, Digest, Book VIII.
Where I purchased something from you, and sold it to Titius, and you deliver it
to Titius with my consent, it is settled that you will be liable to me in case
of eviction, just as if I had received the property and had delivered it
myself.
62. Celsus, Digest, Book XXVII.
If I should sell you any property which is in your possession, it is settled
that I will be liable on the ground of eviction, for the reason that it is
considered the same as delivered.
(1) Where several heirs are left by a party who sold me property, the
obligation with reference to eviction applies to all of them and all of them
should be notified, and all ought to defend the suit. If they purposely do not
appear in court, or one of them appears for all in the case, all of them will
be successful, or will be defeated on account of the effect of the notice, and
the absence above mentioned, and I can legally proceed against the others,
because they were defeated on the ground of eviction.
(2) If you should sell me a tract of land with the reservation of the usufruct
in the same, and the said usufruct belonged to Titius, to whom it had been left
during his lifetime, and I am ignorant of the fact, and Titius should forfeit
his civil rights, but afterwards having recovered them, should bring suit
claiming that he was entitled to the right of the use and enjoyment of the
property, an action under the stipulation, on the ground of eviction, will lie
in my favor against you; although if what you stated to me at the time of the
sale were true, I could very properly deny that Titius was entitled to the use
and enjoyment of said property.
63. Modestinus, Digest, Book V.
Herennius Modestinus was of the opinion that the purchaser, in bringing an
action on sale, would not be barred because notice of the eviction had not been
served upon him, if the necessity for notifying him had been released by the
agreement.
(1) Gaia Seia purchased a tract of land from Lucius Titius, and proceedings
having been instituted against her in the name of the Treasury, she had
recourse to the vendor, and eviction having taken place, she was deprived of
the land which was adjudged to the Treasury, the vendor being present at the
time. The question arises, as the purchaser did not appeal, whether she can sue
the vendor? Herennius Modestinus answered that if the land belonged to another
when it was sold, or if it was hypothecated at the time it was evicted, there
is no reason why the purchaser should not be entitled to an action against the
vendor.
(2) Herennius Modestinus gave it as his opinion that if the purchaser appealed,
and lost a good case through prescription by his own fault, he cannot have
recourse to the vendor.
64. Papinianus, Questions, Book VII.
A river swept away two hundred jugera from a tract of land which contained a
thousand when it was transferred. If two hundred jugera of the undivided
remainder should afterwards be evicted, the stipulation for double damages will
apply to the fifth, and not to the fourth part of said land; for the loss of
what was swept away must be borne
by the purchaser, and not by the vendor. Where the entire tract which was
diminished by the river is evicted, the obligation providing for eviction will
not be lessened by law, any more than if a tract of land or a slave should
become depreciated in value through neglect; as, on the other hand, the amount
for which the vendor is liable, in case of eviction, will not be increased if
the property should have been improved.
(1) Where the amount of land which was transferred remains unimpaired, and two
hundred jugera are added to the same by alluvion, and afterwards a fifth part
of the entire undivided tract is evicted, the fifth part alone must be made
good by the vendor; just as would be the case if two hundred jugera of the
thousand which had been delivered were evicted, because the vendor does not
guarantee any loss due to alluvial deposit.
(2) Where two hundred jugera were lost out of a thousand which have been
conveyed, and afterwards two hundred more were added by alluvium to another
part of the tract, and then an undivided fifth part of the entire tract should
be evicted; the question arose for what proportion will the vendor be liable. I
stated that, according to what has been previously laid down, the vendor will
not be liable either for the fifth part, or the fourth part of the thousand
jugera, on the ground of eviction; but will only be liable if merely a hundred
and sixty out of the eight hundred jugera should be evicted, for the remaining
forty which have been taken away from the entire tract should be understood to
belong to the addition to the land, pro rata.
(3) Again, where a certain part of a tract of land, which is separate, is
evicted, although a certain number of jugera were conveyed, still, the amount
evicted must be made good, not in proportion to the quantity of the land, but
with reference to its quality.
(4) Where a party who owned a half interest in an undivided jugerumof land,
sold and delivered it, he did not, according to the opinion of the authorities,
convey the entire ownership, but only the undivided half of the same; just as
if he had transferred a certain tract of land or a field in this way.
65. The Same, Questions, Book VIII.
Certain heirs sold property belonging to the estate, which had been pledged,
and bound themselves to the extent of their respective shares in case of
eviction. One of them released the pledge so far as his share was concerned,
and the creditor acquired the property by eviction; the question then arose
whether suit could be brought against both heirs. This was held to be the case,
on account of the indivisible nature of the pledge, and there did not seem to
be any remedy which could be applied, in order that, by interposing an
exception on the ground of fraud, the rights of action might be assigned to the
heir who paid the money to the creditor; because it could be asserted that both
the parties had become liable for the entire indebtedness, but they would be
entitled to an action for partition of the estate on this account. For what
difference does it make if one of heirs should en-
tirely release the pledge, or whether he should only do so with reference to
his share, since the negligence of one heir should not be injurious to his co-
heir?
66. The Same, Questions, Book XXVIII.
If the vendor should notify the purchaser to institute proceedings under the
Publician Action, or under the action which has been framed with reference to
land subject to tax, and the purchaser has neglected to do this, his bad faith
will only injure himself, and the stipulation will not become operative.
This rule does not apply to the Servian Action, for although it is a real
action, still, it deprives the party of the bare possession, and after the
money has been paid to the vendor it will be disposed of; wherefore, the result
is that the purchaser cannot bring it in his own name.
(1) Where anyone who is absent on public business brings suit to recover a
tract of land, the possessor can avail himself of an equitable action in case
of eviction. This principle also applies where a party who has been deprived of
his property by a soldier brings suit, for the same equity demands that the
action for restitution, in case of eviction, should be granted to the
purchaser.
(2) If the second purchaser of a slave should appoint the vendor, who was
himself the first purchaser, his attorney to conduct the case, and the slave
was not given up, and a decision was rendered against him; whatever the said
attorney may have paid on the judgment, just as if he was acting in his own
behalf, cannot be recovered under the stipulation, but, for the reason that the
loss resulting from eviction must be personally borne by the purchaser, who
could recover nothing in an action on mandate, he can legally bring an action
on sale for the recovery of the amount of damages assessed by the court.
(3) Where partition has been effected among co-heirs and the agent of one who
is absent appears for him, and the principal of the latter ratifies his act;
the same action will be granted against the principal, in case the land is
evicted, which would have been granted against him who transacted his business
while he was absent, and the plaintiff can recover the amount of his interest,
that is to say, the amount by which the property was diminished or increased,
based upon what it was worth at the time the partition was made, according as
the land was rendered more or less valuable.
67. The Same, Opinions, Book X.
After the eviction of a slave whom the real owner took away from the purchaser,
the vendor cannot properly make a defence by afterwards offering the same slave
to avoid indemnifying the purchaser for his interest.
68. The Same, Opinions, Book XL
Where a pledge is sold under the condition that the creditor will not be liable
for anything in case of eviction, even though the purchaser should not pay the
price, but gives security to the vendor; if
eviction takes place, the purchaser will not be entitled to an exception to
avoid paying the price of the property.
(1) Where a creditor has preferred to take a claim owned by the debtor by way
of substitution for the money due, and the pledges taken by the former creditor
are evicted; he will be entitled to no action against the debtor whom he
released.
69. Scौvola, Questions, Book II.
Where the vendor reserves the question of freedom in the sale of a slave, he
will not be liable on the ground of eviction, if at the time that the slave was
delivered he should become free, or should obtain his liberty when a condition
prescribed by will is fulfilled.
(1) Where a vendor, in delivering a slave, states that he is to be free on a
certain condition, it is understood that only the kind of freedom is referred
to which can result from the fulfillment of a condition already prescribed by a
will, and therefore if freedom was conferred at once by the will, and the
vendor says that the slave will be liberated under a condition, he will be
liable in case of eviction.
(2) On the other hand, where anyone sells a slave who has the prospect of
freedom, and states the condition under which he will be entitled to be free,
and in doing so causes his condition to be considered worse, because he would
not be held to have excepted every condition under which the slave would be
free, but only that which he indicated; as, for instance, if anyone should say
that the slave was ordered to pay ten aurei to become free, and he should
obtain his liberty after the lapse of a year, because his freedom had been
granted in the following terms: "Let Stichus be free after a year," the vendor
will be liable in case of eviction.
(3) But what if a slave whom the vendor had declared would be free on the
payment of twenty aurei had been, in fact, ordered to pay ten; would the vendor
be considered to have told a falsehood with reference to the condition? It is
true that he made a false statement with reference to the condition, and
therefore certain jurists have held that, in this instance also, the
stipulation would become operative in case of eviction. The authority of
Servius, however, prevailed, who thought that under these circumstances an
action on purchase would lie; because it was his opinion that he who stated
that the slave had been ordered to pay twenty aurei had excepted the condition
which depended upon the payment.
(4) A slave was ordered to be free after his accounts had been rendered; the
heir sold and delivered him, and stated that he had been directed to pay a
hundred aurei for his freedom. If nothing remained which the slave was obliged
to pay when he rendered his accounts, he therefore became free as soon as the
estate was entered upon, and liability for eviction was contracted for the
reason that a man who was free was sold as one whose liberty was dependent on a
condition. If the slave was a defaulter to the amount of a hundred aurei, it
may be held that the heir did not tell a falsehood; and as the slave was
ordered to render his accounts, it is understood that he was directed to make
good the amount of money collected which remained unpaid. The result of this
is, that, if he was in default for less than a hundred aurei, for example, only
fifty, so that he would obtain his freedom when he paid this sum, the purchaser
will be entitled to an action on sale to recover the remaining fifty aurei.
(5) Where anyone, at the time of the sale, states indefinitely that a slave
will be conditionally free, but conceals the condition of his freedom, he will
be liable to an action on sale if the purchaser is not aware of the fact; for,
in this instance, it is settled that he who says that a slave has a prospect of
freedom, and does not mention any condition, will indeed not be liable on the
ground of eviction, if the condition is fulfilled, and the slave obtains his
freedom; but he will be liable to an action on sale provided he concealed the
condition which he knew had been prescribed; just as where a party sells a
tract of land, and being aware that a certain servitude was due from it, stated
indefinitely, "that all rights of way of every description would continue to be
enjoyed by those entitled to them," is properly held to have released himself
from liability for eviction, but, because he deceived the purchaser, he will be
liable to an action on sale.
(6) Where the amount stated to be included in a tract of land which is sold
falls short, a part of the price is deducted in proportion to the value of all
the jugera which the land was alleged to contain.
70. Paulus, Questions, Book V.
Where property is evicted an action on purchase will not only lie for the
recovery of the price, but also for the amount of the interest of the buyer.
Hence, if the property has become less valuable, the loss must be sustained by
the buyer.
71. The Same, Questions, Book XVI.
A father gave a tract of land to his daughter by way of dowry. This having been
evicted, a doubt arises (and not without reason) as to whether an action on
purchase will lie, or one for double damages based on the stipulation; just as
if the father himself had suffered loss. For as the dowry belongs to the woman,
it cannot be said to be the property of the father, nor can she be compelled,
during the continuation of the marriage, to share with her brothers the dowry
which is derived from him.
Let us see, however, whether it can not be said with greater probability that
under these circumstances the stipulation becomes operative; for it is to the
interest of the father that his daughter should be endowed, and if she remains
under his control, he may have the expectation of sometime recovering the
dowry.
But if she has been emancipated, it can hardly be maintained that the
stipulation immediately becomes operative, because in one instance the dowry
may revert to him. Therefore, can he bring an action against the vendor, since,
if his daughter should die during marriage, he will be able to recover the
dowry in case the land should not be evicted?
Or, in this case, has the father an interest in having his daughter endowed, so
that he can at once bring suit against the promisor? This opinion is the better
one, as paternal affection is involved in the matter.
72. Callistratus, Questions, Book II.
Where several tracts of land are sold and expressly and specifically described
in one and the same instrument of sale, each of these is not held to be a part
of any other, but all the tracts are included in a single purchase. And, just
as if anyone should sell several slaves by a single bill of sale, the action
for eviction will include each head of said slaves individually; and just as
also where a single purchase is made of several other articles, and only one
bill of sale is drawn up, there are, however, as many actions for eviction as
there are different kinds of property included in the purchase; so, in the case
stated, the purchaser certainly will not be prohibited from bringing suit
against the vendor if one of said tracts is evicted, because the transaction
included several pieces of land conveyed by one instrument of sale.
73. Paulus, Opinions, Book VII.
Seia gave, by way of dowry, the Mौvian and Seian estates, together with others.
Her husband, Titius, during the life of Seia, kept possession of said tracts
without any dispute arising, but after the death of Seia, Sempronia, who was
her heir, raised a question as to the ownership of the land. I ask, as
Sempronia herself was the heir of Seia, whether she could legally make such a
claim? Paulus answered that she could do so in her own right, but could not, as
the heir of Seia, claim the property in question; but if the land was evicted,
the heir of Seia could sue Sempronia, or she could be barred by an exception on
the ground of bad faith.
74. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book II.
If it should be agreed that more or less than the price should be paid, in case
of eviction, the parties must abide by this agreement.
(1) If, by order of court, a pledge taken to secure the execution of a judgment
is sold, and it is afterwards evicted, an action on purchase will be granted
against the defendant who was released by payment of the price, not for the
amount of the interest of the buyer, but for the price alone and the interest
on the same to be paid out of the profits, provided the buyer was not required
to refund this money to him who obtained the property by eviction.
(2) Where a claim is formally made, the vendor can be sued, not for the
recovery of the purchase-money, but to force him to defend the action.
(3) Where anyone sells a claim without a guarantee, he can only be compelled to
show that it exists, and not that anything can be collected on it, but he will
be responsible for fraud.
75. Venuleius, Stipulations, Book XVI.
With reference to rural servitudes, where they tacitly follow the land, and are
recovered by a third party, Quintus Mucius and Sabinus hold that the vendor
cannot be held liable for eviction, for no one is liable on this ground in
cases where there is a tacit accession to property; unless the land is conveyed
as absolutely and entirely unincumbered, for then it should be warranted to be
free from all servitudes. If, however, the purchaser demands a right of way or
a driveway, the vendor cannot be held liable, unless he expressly stated that a
right of way of some description was accessory to the property, for then he who
made the statement will be liable.
The opinion of Quintus Mucius, who stated that a party who conveys land as
absolutely and entirely unincumbered warrants it to be free from every
servitude, is correct; for other servitudes are not due unless it has been
expressly stated by the vendor that they are accessories.
76. The Same, Stipulations, Book XVII.
If you sell me property belonging to another, and I abandon the same, it is
settled that my power to act, that is to say, my right to bring suit on account
of eviction, is lost.
TITLE III.
CONCERNING THE EXCEPTION ON THE GROUND OF PROPERTY SOLD AND DELIVERED.
1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXVI.
Marcellus says that if you sell a tract of land belonging to another, and
afterwards, it having become yours, you bring suit against the purchaser for
its recovery, you will very properly be barred by this exception.
(1) The same rule must be held to apply to the owner of the land, if he becomes
the heir of the vendor.
(2) Where anyone sells property of mine under my direction, and I bring an
action to recover the same, I will be barred by this exception; unless it is
proved that I directed that the property should not be delivered before the
purchase-money was paid.
(3) Celsus says if anyone should dispose of my property for a smaller sum than
I directed it should be sold for, it is held not to be alienated, and if I
bring suit to recover it, I cannot be barred by this exception, and this is
correct.
(4) If a slave purchases merchandise with money belonging to his peculium, and
his master orders him to become free by his will before he obtains the
ownership of the property, and bequeaths to him his peculium,and the vendor
brings suit to recover the merchandise from the slave; an exception in factum
can be pleaded, on the ground that he was a slave at the time he made the
contract.
(5) Where anyone purchases property which was not delivered to him, but of
which he obtained possession without fraud, he will be entitled to an exception
against the vendor, unless the latter should have good reason for bringing suit
to recover the property; for even if he had delivered possession, and he had
just cause of action for recovery, he could avail himself of a reply to the
exception.
2. Pomponius, On Plautius, Book II.
If you purchase a tract of land from Titius, which in fact belonged to
Sempronius, and after the price was paid he delivers it to you, and Titius then
becomes the heir of Sempronius, and sells and delivers the same land to Mौvius;
Julianus says that it is more equitable, for you have the prior lien, because
if Titius himself had attempted to recover the land from you, he would have
been barred by an exception; and if Titius himself had held possession of it,
you could have recourse to the Publician Action.
3. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book VI.
The exception on the ground of property sold and delivered is available, not
only by him to whom it was delivered, but also by his successors, as well as by
a second purchaser, even if it was not delivered to him, for it is to the
interest of the first purchaser that the second should not be deprived of the
property by eviction.
(1) On the same principle, the successors of a vendor can be barred, whether
they have succeeded to all his rights, or merely to that which has reference to
the property involved.
