# -*- mode: org -*-

* BOOK XXX.
* 30.I. CONCERNING LEGACIES AND TRUSTS.

1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXVII.Legacies are equal in every respect to
trusts.

2. The Same, Trusts, Book I.
It must be remembered that only those can bequeath property in trust who have
testamentary capacity.

3. The Same, On Sabinus, Book IV.
The following words of a testator: "Whoever of the parties above mentioned
shall be my heir," or, "If Seius should be my heir," or, "If he should enter
upon my estate," any trust subsequently bequeathed will not, for this reason,
be conditional.

4. The Same, On Sabinus, Book V.
Where a testator is mistaken with reference to the name of a tract of land, and
mentions the Cornelian, instead of the Sempronian Estate, the Sempronian Estate
will be due. If, however, he should be mistaken with reference to the land
itself, it will not be due. For if anyone, intending to bequeath a garment,
bequeaths household goods, thinking that clothing is included in the term
"household goods," Pomponius states that clothing will not be due; just as if
anyone should think that electrun or brass was included in the term gold; or,
which is even more absurd, if he thought that silver was included in the word
clothing; for the names of things are unchangeable, those of men, however, are
subject to alteration.
(1) Where anyone appoints an heir and makes a bequest as follows: "Whoever
shall be the heir to my property in Gaul shall be charged with the payment of
So-and-So," the legacy is considered to be due from all the heirs, as the
property involved belongs to all of them.

5. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book I.
Where a slave is left to be selected by the legatee, we can make a choice but
once.
(1) Labeo says that when a certain article or slave is bequeathed as follows:
"Who will be mine when I die shall be given by my heir," and the article or
slave is held in common, the whole of it will be due.
Cassius states that Trebatius gave it as his opinion that only the share owned
by the testator is due; which is correct.
(2) Where a tract of land owned in common is devised, without mentioning the
share belonging to the testator, but where he merely says "mine", it is
established that only his share will be due.

6. Julianus, Digest, Book XXXIII.
"Let my heir give Stichus, who will be mine when I die." It is evident that the
testator rather intended to impose a condition, than merely to point out the
slave; for the reason that if this clause was inserted merely for the purpose
of designating the slave, it would have been framed as follows: "Stichus who is
mine," and not, "Who will be mine". A condition of this kind should, however,
be understood to mean only "if he shall be mine," in order that, if he should
alienate him altogether, the legacy will be extinguished; but if he should
alienate him partially, only that share of the slave will be due which belonged
to the testator at the time of his death.

7. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book II.
A master can reject a legacy bequeathed to his slave.

8. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book II.
If a testator, after having bequeathed a tract of land, should dispose
of a part of the same, it is held that only the remaining portion is due to the
party to whom it was left; because even if an addition was made to said land
the legatee would profit by the increase.
(1) If the following provision should be inserted in a will: "Let Lucius
Titius, my heir, or Maevius, my heir, pay ten aureito Seius," Seius can bring
suit against whichever of the heirs he may select, and if he brings an action
against one of them, and payment is made by him, the other will be released;
just as where two debtors have promised to pay, both will be liable for the
entire amount. But what if the legatee should only demand half of the amount
from one of the heirs? He would be free to demand the remainder from the other.
The same rule will apply where one of the parties has paid his share.
(2) Where a legacy was bequeathed as follows: "I bequeath eight litter-bearers,
or a certain sum of money instead of each one, of them, whichever the legatee
may desire," the legatee cannot claim a part of his legacy in slaves and the
other part in money, because the legacy is left as an alternative; just as if
fifty pounds weight of oil, or a certain sum instead of each pound, is
bequeathed, for otherwise, a division might be allowed where only a single
slave was bequeathed. Nor does it make any difference whether the sum is
divided, or whether the entire amount is paid at once. And, in fact, where
eight slaves have been bequeathed, or a certain sum of money instead of all of
them, the heir cannot, against his will, be compelled to be liable for a
portion of the bequest in money, and a portion in slaves.

9. The Same, On Sabinus, Book III.
Octavenus states that property in the hands of the enemy can be bequeathed, and
the bequest will stand, under the law of postliminium.

10. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book II.
Julianus holds that a choice cannot be made by a son under paternal control,
without the consent of his father; nor before he has accepted the estate.
11. Papinianus, Questions, Book IX.
Where a legacy has been bequeathed to a son under paternal control, or a slave
belonging to another, or an estate is left to him; it must be left in trust to
the father or master, and only under these circumstances will the trust have
any force or effect, unless it is left to those through whom the benefit of the
estate or the bequest will accrue to the said father or master. Again,
Julianus, induced by a very good reason, gives it as his opinion that a father,
whose son has been appointed an heir, must surrender the estate even to a
stranger, after having deducted the portion granted by the Falcidian Law; since
he is responsible as the representative of his son, for the reason that the
latter cannot be held liable in his own right, and the father cannot be liable
as heir, but is considered to have been charged with the trust in the capacity
of a parent.
Therefore, if the father was charged to deliver to his son, after his death,
what came into his hands through a legacy or an estate bequeathed to his son,
and the latter should die during the lifetime of his father, the father can
retain this beyond all doubt, as the trust acquires its force from the person
of the father.

12. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book HI.
If the same property should be bequeathed to me and to yourself, and on the day
when the legacy was due, I should become your heir, Labeo says that I can
acquire the property either for the reason that it was left to me, or because I
am your heir. Proculus says, that if I should wish to whole of it to belong to
me on account of the legacy which was bequeathed to me, I must demand it on the
ground of being heir to the legacy.
(1) Where anyone charges his heir to deliver to me, within three days after his
death, certain slaves whom he had at Gades, by a will which he made at Rome
just before he died, the legacy will be valid; and the shortness of the time
provided will in no way prejudice the legatee.
(2) A rule of the Civil Law provides that, "We can bequeath a legacy to slaves
belonging to those to whom we can also make a bequest."
(3) In the matter of legacies, the last instruments drawn up are valid;
because, where previously executed, they can be changed either with reference
to the day or the condition, or they can be entirely annulled. Where a legacy
left under one condition is taken away by another, the last provision, by which
it is taken away, must be considered. Sometimes, however, not the last, but the
former disposition of the property is valid, for if I should say: "What I have
left herein to Titius I neither give nor bequeath to him," what has been left
to him by the will will not be valid; for it is held that the same clause by
which legacies granted at a certain time are to be deferred has reference also
to the provisions subsequently made. Therefore the desire of the testator
establishes the validity of what he inserted in his will.

13. The Same, On Sabinus, Book IV.
Where a slave, insufficiently described, was left to you, and the heir
delivered Stichus to your slave, Neratius was of the opinion that if the
delivery was made with the consent of the master, or he ratified the act, the
heir will be released, just as if Stichus himself had been bequeathed.

14. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XV.
Where it was inserted in a will that, "If I should make a bequest twice to a
certain individual, my heir shall only pay him one legacy;" or "One legacy only
shall be due;" and he bequeaths to the said party two separate sums of money,
or two separate tracts of land, will both of them be due? Aristo says that it
appears but one legacy will be due, for whatever is taken away is not held to
have been given, according to the opinion of Celsus and Marcellus; which is
correct.
(1) Papinianus, however, says, in the Nineteenth Book of Questions, that if a
testator, after having left several legacies to the same person, asserts that
he expects only one of them to be paid, and does this before completing his
will, the other legacies should be considered as annulled by operation of law.
Which one, however, should be considered to have
been taken away, for this is not apparent? And he says it can be held that the
smallest one should be paid.

15. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book III.
Where a person intended to bequeath the fourth part of his property, he wrote
the half. Proculus very properly said that the fourth could have been
maintained to have been bequeathed, for the reason that it is contained in the
half. The same rule will apply if the testator intended to bequeath fifty
aurei,and wrote a hundred, for fifty will be due. Where, however, he intended
to bequeath more, and wrote less, the bequest will be valid.
(1) Where anyone bequeaths a sum of money to his daughters, having in mind a
posthumous daughter, and she should not be born, the entire sum will be due to
the survivor.

16. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book V.
Where the same property is bequeathed to two persons conjointly, and one of
them is not in existence, I think that it is true that only a half is due to
the survivor.
(1) Where an heir is charged with the payment of a legacy together with another
who is not his co-heir, he who was appointed owes the entire legacy; for if the
testator expressly charged two heirs with the payment, and one of them does not
enter upon the estate, the other who did would owe the whole amount, if the
share of him who refused the estate should come into the hands of the heir who
accepted it.
(2) Where a legacy is left to Titius and the posthumous child of the testator,
and no posthumous child is born; Titius can claim the entire amount. If,
however, the testator intended to bequeath equal shares to Titius and his own
posthumous children, or even if he had expressed himself to this effect, the
entire legacy will be due to Titius, if no posthumous child should be born.

17. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XV.
Where a person made a bequest to his daughters and mentioned a posthumous
daughter in some part of his will, he is held to have had the posthumous
daughter in his mind at the time he made the bequest.
(1) Where anyone makes a bequest as follows: "If a daughter should be born to
me, let my heir give her a hundred aurei,"and several daughters should be born,
it is held that each one of them is entitled to the same bequest, which must be
understood in this way, unless it is clear that the intention of the testator
was otherwise.
(2) Where the bequest is made to one of several heirs, it is evident that the
judge must award it as due in an action brought for partition; and it is
established that even if the party should reject the estate, he will be
entitled to recover a legacy of this kind.

18. Julianus, Digest, Book XXXVII.
He can, indeed, claim the entire legacy, even though he would have been himself
improperly charged if he had not refused the estate.

19. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XV.
Papinianus holds in the Book of Questions that where legacies have been left in
such a way as to be of no effect, they can be confirmed by repetition; that is
to say, by the following clause subsequently inserted in a codicil: "Let my
heir pay him this, in addition;" and where something different is afterwards
stated: "Let my heir be charged with the payment of the money which I have
bequeathed, on the days which I have fixed, and not at the end of one, two, and
three years;" for the testator did not do this for the purpose of confirming
the bequests which were void, but merely to prolong the time of payment for
those which were valid.
(1) The same authority states in the same place, with reference to a substitute
appointed for a child under the age of puberty, that if the said child should
be improperly charged with the payment of a legacy, his substitute must pay it,
if anything more has been left in his charge, and the heir should die without
becoming the successor of his father.
(2) Where property is bequeathed to several persons, and the shares are not
designated, all will inherit equally.

20. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book V.
Where a testator has two slaves, and bequeaths one of them in such a way that
it cannot be ascertained which one he bequeathed, the legatee can make his
choice.

21. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XV.
If a flock of sheep was left, any increase which subsequently takes place will
belong to the legatee.

22. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book V.
Where a drove of cattle was bequeathed, and some of them die during the life of
the testator, and others are substituted in their stead, the drove is held to
be the same. If the drove should be diminished to such an extent that only a
single ox survives, it can be claimed, even though the drove, as such, has
ceased to exist; just as in the case where a house which has been devised is
burned, the land on which it stood can be claimed.

23. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book III.
Where a person bequeaths a part of his property, as is the custom at present,
it can be surrendered without the crops, unless the heir is in default.

24. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book V.
It is established that what is not yet in existence can be bequeathed, for
example: "Any child that the female slave, So-and-So, may bring forth;" or
where a bequest is made as follows: "Let any wine which Way be produced on my
land, or any increase of the flocks, be given by my heir."
(1) If I have only an usufruct, and bequeath it, the bequest will be Void,
unless I should afterwards acquire the ownership of the property.
(2) Where anyone, after having made a will by which the Titian Estate was
bequeathed, adds thereto another tract of land, which he intends to include
with the same estate, the addition can be demanded by the legatee. The same
rule prevails in the case of alluvium, especially if, when the testator
executed his will, he made the addition from another field which belonged to
him.
(3) It should be considered what the rule would be if, after having made a
will, he took something from the Titian Estate, and added it to land belonging
to another; would the legatee be entitled to claim the part which was deducted,
just as if it had ceased to form part of the Titian Estate, since it is by our
intention, and not by the nature of the property, that the disposition of a
tract of land or a house is determined. The better opinion is that what is
joined to another tract of land should be held to have been deducted.
(4) If I should bequeath a ship, and state expressly that it was mine, and that
I have entirely rebuilt it and only the original keel remains, it can,
nevertheless, be properly claimed by the legatee.
25. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book III.
A son who has been appointed an heir can be absolutely charged with a legacy
for the benefit of his father, nor does it make any difference whether or not
he was under the control of his father at the time that the legacy vested.
Therefore, if he accepts the estate by the order of his father, the legacy will
be included in the Falcidian share to which he is legally entitled.
26. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book V.
No more of a legacy is considered to belong to anyone than what remains after a
deduction has been made of property given in order to comply with a condition.
(1) Where an heir is directed to give a certain article by way of legacy, and
does not do so, because he was not obliged to deliver it to the legatee in the
place where it was; and it should afterwards be destroyed without the fraud or
negligence of the heir, the loss must be borne by the legatee.
(2) Where, however, a part of his estate is bequeathed, it is doubtful whether
a portion of the property itself, or the estimated value of the same should be
given. Sabinus and Cassius think that the value should be paid; Proculus and
Nerva hold that a part of the property bequeathed should be delivered. It is
necessary, however, to come to the relief of the heir, so that he himself may
determine whether he prefers to give a portion of the property itself, or to
pay its estimated value. But in matters of this kind, the heir will be obliged
to give a portion of the property which can be divided without any loss, but if
it is naturally incapable of division, or if the division cannot be effected
without loss, the estimated value of the property must, by all means, be paid
by the heir.

27. Paulus, On Plautius, Book IX.
Moreover, the heir can give to the legatee the share which has been left him by
delivering to him a certain part of the property, or one arti-
cle alone, the value of which the legatee shall agree to accept, or the judge
shall determine; in order that the legatee may not be forced to demand a share
of all the property.

28. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XIX.
If I bequeath to my creditor what I owe him, I being protected against the debt
by an exception, the legacy will be valid; for the reason that a release of the
exception is held to have been made. This corresponds to what Aristo says,
namely, that if my debtor bequeaths to me what is due from him to me in a
praetorian action, the legacy will be valid; for the reason that a civil action
is granted me instead of an honorary one.
(1) Marcellus holds, in the Twenty-eighth Book, that if you should bequeath to
me what you owe me under a stipulation, the legacy will be valid, and the
bequest will not be diminished on account of the Falcidian Law.
29. Ulpianus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book VI.
If, however, the claim is not rendered more advantageous to the creditor,
either by modification, time, condition, or place, the bequest is void.
30. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XIX.
A provision as follows: "Let my heir pay the money which I have bequeathed, and
for the payment of which I have not set a time, at the end of one, two, and
three years," this will not refer to all articles which may be bequeathed, but
only to such as can be weighed, counted, or measured.
(1) And it only applies to those legacies for which time of payment has not
been fixed; hence if the legacy was absolutely bequeathed, its time of payment
will be prolonged by this addition.
(2) What if a hundred aureiin cash should be bequeathed to me, shall payment be
made on stated days, or all at once? Servius and Labeo say that the legacy is
due at once, in cash. Therefore, although this addition may be superfluous, so
far as the force and effect of the legacy is concerned, still, it will apply in
such a way as to make the legacy due immediately.
(3) But if the legacy should be left payable by the year or by the month, this
provision will not apply, because this legacy has a beginning and an end.
(4) Where, however, a legacy is bequeathed under a condition, it can be said
that the payment of the same at intervals will not be applicable, because the
condition is considered uncertain. (5) In accordance with this, Trebatius
thinks that if a bequest is made to a person to be paid when he is twenty years
of age, the provision above-mentioned, as commonly interpreted, does not apply.
(6) Again, this provision is not applicable where money is left which is in the
testator's chest, or wine which is in his warehouse; because we have stated
that it is not operative where any certain kind of property is bequeathed.
(7) Gallus Aquilius, Ofilius, and Trebatius have given it as their opinion that
this rule not only applies to legacies previously made, but also to all those
mentioned in the will, which is true.

31. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book III.
This provision has reference also to all legacies which are afterwards
confirmed by codicils.

32. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XX.
Where anyone bequeaths money to be paid by his minor son, who is appointed his
heir, "When he arrives at puberty," and he also charges the heir whom he
substitutes with the payment of the same, and the son dies before reaching
puberty, the substituted heir will not owe the legacy. Sextus and Pomponius,
however, do not think that this is correct, where the repetition of the legacy
has been stated as follows, for instance: "Let my heir pay upon the same day
the legacy with which I have charged my son, and which I have ordered him to
pay if he shall become my heir."
If, however, the repetition was made as follows, "Let my heir pay the legacies,
with the payment of which I have charged my son;" the legacies appear to have
been repeated unconditionally, and the designation of them has only been made
by the testator. Therefore, this very legacy with reference to which inquiry is
made will be due me.
(1) Where anyone has several slaves named Stichus, and bequeaths Stichus, and
it is not evident which Stichus he meant, the heir must deliver the slave
chosen by the legatee.
(2) If anything should be left to a portion of the people of a town, which is
for the ornament or benefit of the entire community, it undoubtedly will be
due.

33. Paulus, Rules, Book III.
Where the same property is left to several persons, or it is left to all
conjointly; and one brings suit to recover it, and another brings an action for
the same purpose under the will, he who founds his action on the will cannot
recover any more than his share of the legacy.
If it should be left to each person separately, and it is perfectly evident
that the testator intended, by depriving the first legatee of the bequest, to
confer it upon the second; it is established that the last legatee will be
entitled to all of it. If, however, this does not plainly appear, all the
legatees will be entitled to equal shares of the bequest; unless, indeed, the
testator himself manifestly indicated by his language that he intended one of
them to receive the entire property, for then the value of the article should
be given to one of them, and the article itself to the other. And he who first
joined issue with reference to the legacy, or the trust, shall have the right
to choose which he will prefer, the property itself, or the value of the same;
still, after having chosen one he will not be permitted to abandon it, and
select the other.

34. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXI.
It is evident that where the testator intended to transfer the legacy to
another party, it will not be due to the first one named, even if the last
mentioned is not capable of receiving it. If, however, the legatees were joint,
or, being originally several, have afterwards been united, all of them together
are classed as one and the same person.
(1) Where the same property is bequeathed several times by the game will, it
cannot be claimed more than once; and it is sufficient if the property itself,
or the value of the same, is acquired.
(2) Where the same property is bequeathed to me by the wills of two persons, I
can demand it twice, and obtain the property by virtue of one of the wills, and
the estimated value of the same by virtue of the other.
(3) Where no certain article is bequeathed, but a specified sum is mentioned
several times in the same will, the Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that the
heir must pay the said sum several times, if it is established by perfectly
conclusive evidence that the testator intended to multiply the legacy.
The same rule has also been laid down by him with reference to a trust. The
reason of this is evident, for as the identical thing cannot be delivered more
than once, the same sum can be multiplied, if this should be the intention of
the testator.
(4) This, however, ought only to be understood to be applicable where a certain
amount of money should be left several times by the testator; as, for instance,
a hundred aurei,which he has in his chest; for then I believe that it should be
compared to the bequest of a tract of land.
(5) Where, however, a certain weight of gold or of silver has been left,
Papinianus is of the opinion that it should rather be compared to the bequest
of a sum of money, as no certain kind of property appears to have been
bequeathed.
(6) Hence, if anything else which can be weighed, counted or measured has been
left several times, it must be said that the same rule will apply; that is to
say, it will be due several times, if such was the intention of the testator.
(7) If, however, I should purchase the property bequeathed to me, an action
under the will will lie in my favor for the amount of the price which I have
paid.
(8) And, with much more reason can this be said, where the same property is
bequeathed to me by the wills of two different persons, but where one asked me
to surrender the property itself to another, or something else in its stead; or
where it was bequeathed under the condition of giving something in place of it;
for I am considered to have been deprived of the property to the amount which I
am compelled to Pay in order to obtain it.
(9) Where the property is bequeathed to several persons conjointly, it is
settled that it is divided into shares from the beginning. The legatees have
not only the right to a division in proportion to the number of persons to whom
the legacy was left, but also those who are not entitled to it; as, for
instance, where a bequest was made to Titius and to his slave, without granting
the latter his freedom.
(10) Where a testator, by a will made while his son is under the age of
puberty, bequeaths the same property to another which he had already left to me
by will, Julianus says that the parties do not take the property concurrently.
Therefore, in the meantime, he to whom the property has been bequeathed by the
will of the father will be entitled to his share.
(11) Where the same property is bequeathed to two persons, one of whom is
appointed heir, if the latter is charged with the payment of part of the legacy
to himself, it will be held to be, to this extent, invalid ; and therefore, the
share with which he was charged in his own favor will belong to his co-
legatees.
(12) Hence, it must be said that where there are two heirs, one of whom is
appointed for one-twelfth, and the other for eleven-twelfths of the estate, and
a tract of land is bequeathed to them; one of the heirs will be entitled to
eleven-twelfths of the land, and his co-heir to one-twelfth of the same.
(13) It is clear that if one of the legatees becomes the heir of the party
charged with the payment of the legacy, this will render his coheir none the
less entitled to half of it, for he will retain his share of the legacy in the
same proportion.
(14) If a bequest is made to Titius in the following terms: "Let him have the
Seian Estate, or the usufruct of the same for himself," there are two legacies,
and it is at the option of the legatee whether or not he will only claim the
usufruct.
(15) Where anyone makes a bequest as follows: "I do give and bequeath to Titius
a certain tract of land, which he can have for his share," it seems to me that
it can be said that he will be entitled to half of it; for it is held that by
the mention of the land he did not refer to the entire tract, but to a part of
the same, for a part is also properly designated a tract.

35. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book III.
Where an heir is charged with the delivery of a slave belonging to another, and
the slave is manumitted by his master, nothing is due on account of the legacy.

36. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book VI.
"I bequeath to Titia all my slaves who are weavers, except those whom I have
bequeathed to another by this will. I bequeath to Plotia all my slaves, born in
my house, except those whom I have bequeathed to another." As certain slaves
born in his house were also weavers, Labeo says that since it cannot be
ascertained which slaves who were weavers the testator did not bequeath to
Titia unless it is known which ones he bequeathed to Plotia, and as this can
not be ascertained, those must not be excepted from either legacy who belong to
both classes, and therefore they are common to both legatees; for this is the
rule of law where nothing is expressly excepted from either of two legacies.
(1) Where, however, a legacy was bequeathed in the following terms: "All my
slaves, who are weavers, except those born under my
roof," and again, "All the slaves born under my roof except the weavers," those
who were both born under his roof and were weavers, will not be included in
either legacy.
(2) It makes no difference whether a legacy is bequeathed "To Titius and
Maevius," or "To Titius together with Maevius;" for in both these instances the
legacy is held to have been bequeathed conjointly.
(3) If an heir should deliver Stichus to one of two parties to whom he was
charged to deliver him, and, before proceedings were instituted against him by
the other legatee, Stichus should die, the heir will not be liable, because it
is understood that no blame attached to him.

37. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXL
Where property has been bequeathed in general terms, as, for example, a slave,
Gaius Cassius says that care should be taken that neither the best nor the
worst slave should be received by the legatee. This opinion is confirmed by a
Rescript of our Emperor and the Divine Severus, who decreed that where a slave
was bequeathed, the one who transacted the business of his master could not be
selected.
(1) Where a testator had in mind a certain tract of land, and it is not
apparent what his intention was with reference to it, the heir shall have the
choice to give the tract which he prefers; or if the intention of the testator
is clear, the tract itself can be claimed by the legatee. Again, if he
bequeathed a piece of silver plate, and it is not clear which one he meant, the
heir will also have the choice to give the one that he wishes.

38. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book VI.
Alegatee cannot accept a part of his legacy and reject the remainder; his
heirs, however, can do so, so that one of them can accept his share, and
another reject his own.
(1) If we should conclude not to accept a legacy which was left to Us, the
state of affairs will be the same as if the legacy had not been bequeathed; and
therefore we say that if a tract of land is left to me, which is charged with
servitudes in favor of my property, the servitudes will not be confused.
Moreover, if a slave is bequeathed to a person on account of whom the legatee
can institute proceedings for theft, the right of action will remain
unimpaired.
39. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXI.
Where a slave who has been bequeathed is in flight, or is absent in a distant
country, the heir must exert himself to recover the property and deliver it.
This also was stated by Julianus, for Africanus states in the Twentieth of his
Letters on Julianus that, if the heir is compelled to incur any expense in this
matter, he thinks that he should do so; and I hold that his opinion should be
adopted.
(1) The profits of the property should also be deducted in making the claim for
the legacy, not only those, however, which the heir may have collected, but
also such as the legatee could have collected; and
this rule also applies not only to the labor of slaves, but also to the work of
animals, as well as transportation by vessels. What has been stated with
reference to profits must also be understood to apply to the rents of houses in
cities.
With respect to the rate of interest on money, the custom of the country must
be followed, and therefore the court must make an estimate and fix the rate of
interest.
Moreover, if the heir is in default, he will also be liable for the destruction
of the property, and its value must be paid; just as this is done in a
stipulation where the property is lost after the party is in default. This rule
also applies to the offspring of female slaves. Where a slave is bequeathed,
the heir will be bound to surrender everything which he has acquired by means
of said slave, whether it be an estate, a legacy, or anything else.
(2) If Titius should purchase property from me, and bequeath it to me before I
deliver it to him, and then I deliver it and receive the price for the same; he
is considered at first sight to have bequeathed it to me, and hence the legacy
is void.1 But, as I am released from liability to an action on purchase, I can
bring an action to recover the property which I delivered on the ground of its
being a legacy. Still, if the price has not yet been paid to me, Julianus says
that I am entitled to an action on sale to recover the price, and that, in
addition, a suit under the will to recover the property which I sold and
delivered will lie. He also adds that if the price had been paid to me, but I
had not yet delivered the property, I would be free from liability on account
of the right of action to which I would be entitled by virtue of the will.
(3) Julianus likewise stated that if the testator should devise to me a tract
of land which he had purchased from someone else, the heir would be compelled
to transfer to me the right of action to which he was entitled on account of
the purchase; provided the property had not yet been delivered either to the
deceased, or to his heir.
(4) Where anyone makes a bequest to another of the right to quarry stone on his
premises, the question arises whether this legacy also passes to his heir.
Marcellus denies that it does pass to his heir, unless the name of the latter
was mentioned in the bequest.
(5) The heir is compelled to pay any taxes or tributes assessed on the land
which was bequeathed, for sun-dials or for sewers, or for the right to conduct
water.
(6) I know that the following case has been discussed. A certain person, who
had two tracts of land bearing the same name, bequeathed the Cornelian Estate,
and of the two thus designated one was of greater value than the other. The
heir claimed that the least valuable one was bequeathed, and the legatee
asserted that it was the one of greater value which was intended. It is
generally understood that the one of lesser value was bequeathed, if the
legatee should not be able to prove that the more valuable one was meant by the
testator.
1 For the reason that no one can unconditionally bequeath to another property
which already belongs to the latter. --- ED.
(7) It is established that even property belonging to another can be
bequeathed, provided it can be obtained, even if its acquirement should be
difficult.
(8) If, however, anyone should bequeath the gardens of Sallust which belonged
to Augustus, or the Alban Estate which is set apart for the use of the Imperial
household, he would be considered insane for having made such a bequest in his
will.
(9) It is also established that the Campus Martius, or the Roman Forum, or any
sacred building cannot be devised.
(10) If, however, lands belonging to the Emperor, and forming part of the
Imperial domain or under the superintendence of the Imperial Steward, are
devised, their appraised value will not have to be paid by the heir, as any
commercial disposal of them cannot take place, except by order of the Emperor,
as they are not to be sold.
40. The Same, Trusts, Book II.
If, however, property belonging to another which the legatee has not control of
in the way of trade, and which he has no right to possess, is left subject to a
trust, I think that its estimated value will be due.
41. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XXI.
Now let us examine some other things in addition to what has been mentioned,
and in fact all corporeal property, as well as rights and servitudes can be
bequeathed.
(1) Property, however, which is joined to buildings cannot be disposed of by
will, because the Senate, during the Consulship of Aviola and Pansa, decreed
that this could not be done.
(2) Still, the question may be raised where pieces of marble or columns have
been separated from buildings, whether the legacy does not become valid. And,
indeed, if it was not valid from the beginning, it cannot become so
subsequently, just as where property of mine was bequeathed to me and alienated
after the will had been made, because the legacy had no force or effect in the
beginning; but if it was bequeathed under a condition, the legacy can become
valid, if, at the time when the condition was fulfilled, the property does not
belong to me, or is no longer joined to the building; in accordance with the
opinion of those who hold that I can purchase my own property under A
condition, and that I can also promise it and bequeath it conditionally. Hence,
the rule of Cato stands in the way of an absolute legacy left under such
circumstances, but is not opposed to a conditional one; because it does not
have reference to conditional bequests of this kind.
(3) It may also be asked whether the legacy will be valid where a party has two
houses and devises one of them, and also leaves him to whom he devised the
house something which was joined to the other. This question arises from the
fact that we are permitted by the Decree Of the Senate and the Imperial
Constitutions to transfer to one house property from another of which we are to
remain in possession, that is to say, which is not to be sold. This Our Emperor
and the Divine Severus stated in a Rescript. Therefore cannot I devise property
attached to one house to the person to whom I have devised the other? This will
be denied, for the reason that the party to whom the property is bequeathed
will not be the future possessor of the same.
(4) Where a testator leaves the Sempronian House to two persons, and bequeaths
to one of them the marble which is in it, for the erection of the Seian House,
which he devised to him, it may not unreasonably be asked whether such a
bequest will be valid, for the reason that the legatee is the owner of both
houses.
What would be the case if a person should devise a house, after excepting the
marble which he wished the heir to have for the purpose of building another
house which still remained a part of the estate. The better opinion may be said
to be that the exception will be void in either instance, but the legacy will
be valid, and the appraised value of the property must be paid.
(5) If, however, anyone bequeaths a legacy of this kind for the purpose of
constructing some public work, I think that it will be valid; and Papinianus,
in the Eleventh Book of Opinions, relates that our Emperor and the Divine
Severus decided that those who promised to erect some public work can remove
materials from their city and country houses, and use them with that design,
because they do not remove them for commercial purposes.
Let us, however, consider whether property can only be left to a city situated
in the same territory, or whether it can be transferred elsewhere, to be used
in some other city. I think that this should not be allowed, although it has
been settled that materials can be taken from a house which a man owns and
transported to another belonging to him in a different town.
(6) This Decree of the Senate has reference not only to Rome, but also to other
cities.
(7) There is also a Rescript of the Divine Brothers extant which was issued in
answer to a petition of Proclianus and Epitynchanus, which requested permission
for the removal of property from their houses that they desired to sell for the
purpose of discharging a public debt, and in which the right to sell said
property was denied them.
(8) This Decree of the Senate applies to dwellings, as well as to baths and
every other kind of buildings, such as porticoes, drinking houses, and
restaurants.
(9) It is also forbidden by this decree to bequeath property which the legatee
cannot deliver without detaching it from a building; that is to say, blocks of
marble, or columns. The Senate decided that this also applied to tiles, to
beams, and to doors, as well as to libraries attached to walls.
(10) If, however, the articles consist of lattices, or awnings, it can be
bequeathed, but water mains and reservoirs are not included.
(11) Hydraulic machines, however, and pipes through which the water issues can
be bequeathed, and especially if they are merely placed upon the real property.
(12) What then must be said with reference to statues? Where they are fastened
to the walls it will not be lawful to remove them,
but if they are separate, some doubt exists. The spirit of the Decree of the
Senate must, however, be taken into consideration, and if the statues were
placed in the house to remain there always, and as a portion of the same, they
cannot be removed.
(13) Hence, it must be said that where pictures are attached to the walls, or
small ornaments inserted into the latter, they cannot be
bequeathed.
(14) Where, however, the testator had prepared certain ornaments for the
purpose of removing them to another house, and bequeathed them, a doubt may
arise as to whether the bequest is valid; and I think that it is.
(15) But when the testator fastens to his house the objects which he
bequeathed, the legacy will be extinguished,
42. The Same, Trusts, Book II.
Whether the legatee was aware of this fact or not.
43. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XXI.
The Senate, therefore, does not permit anything which is attached to a house to
be separately bequeathed. But if any of these objects did not form part of the
house at the time of the death of the testator, the heir must pay their
appraised value. If he should detach them for the purpose of paying a legacy,
he will be liable to the penalties prescribed, even though he removed them, not
for the purpose of selling them, but in order to discharge his obligation.
(1) Marcellus also says that if a husband builds a summer-house in the garden
of his wife, which he received by way of dowry, he can remove the same if he
can make use of it himself, without, however, causing his wife any loss; and
that the Decree of the Senate will offer no obstacle to his doing so.
Therefore, if no injury is suffered by his wife, through the removal of the
house, it must be held that he can dispose of it by will, since he can remove
it.
(2) The bequest of a legacy can be made dependent upon the will of a third
party, but not upon that of an heir.
(3) Where one person has ransomed another from the enemy, he can bequeath him
to himself; and a legacy of this kind will cause his release from the
obligation of the pledge which the party who ransomed him possessed.
44. The Same, On Sabine, Book XXII.
A father can bequeath a slave belonging to his son, and who forms part of the
castrense peculiumof the latter, and if the son should die during the lifetime
of his father, and his peculiumremain in the hands of his father, the legacy
will stand; for as the son did not avail himself of his right, the father is
held by retroaction to have the ownership of the slave who formed part of the
peculium.
(1) If anyone should bequeath property belonging to another which had already
been bequeathed to him without his knowledge, and afterwards should learn of
the legacy and wish to acquire it, the
bequest will be valid; for the reason that where the legatee does not reject a
bequest, it is held to have vested in him from the time when the estate of the
testator was entered upon. If, however, he should reject it, the property is
held to belong to the heir from the date of the rejection.
(2) Where anyone bequeaths drinking cups, and they have been melted down, or
vice versa; and also where wool is bequeathed and clothing has been made out of
it; Julianus says, in the Thirty-second Book of the Digest, that the legacy of
all the above-mentioned articles is valid, and that whatever remains of them is
due. I think that this opinion is correct, provided the testator did not change
his mind.
(3) If, however, he should bequeath a silver dish, and it is melted down, and
made into a cup, the cup will be due; provided the intention of the testator
remains the same.
(4) If a house is built upon land which was devised, it will be due to the
devisee, unless the testator changes his will.
(5) A party who bequeaths a note bequeaths the claim and not merely the
material on which the writing appears. This is proved by a sale, for when a
note is sold, the debt by which it is evidenced is also considered to be sold.
(6) However, even though a claim is bequeathed, what is due must be understood
in the most favorable sense, so that the rights of action against the debtor
may be assigned.
(7) Hence, where a slave is both bequeathed and directed to be free, in the
meantime the legacy alone can take effect; for instance, suppose the grant of
freedom was made for the purpose of defrauding a creditor, or if the slave is
one who had already been sold into perpetual servitude, the rule will apply
just as where a slave is given in pledge.
(8) Where a testator bequeaths a slave who is to have his freedom under certain
conditions, it will be better for the heir to furnish the slave himself, rather
than to pay his appraised value, for he must pay his true value. If, however,
he should deliver the slave himself, and the condition should be fulfilled, he
will sustain no injury, for his appraised value cannot be claimed where a free
man is concerned.
(9) Where a testator who owns two tracts of land devises one of them to me, and
the other to Titius, the devisee will not owe me his right to enter upon the
estate, but the heir will be compelled to purchase this right and assign it to
me.
45. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book VI.
If I should bequeath to you certain female slaves to be delivered by the
substitute of a minor heir, and you purchase said slaves from the said heir,
and alienate them before you know that they have been bequeathed to you,
Neratius, Aristo, and Ofilius hold that the legacy will be valid.
(1) Where an heir is charged in general terms with the delivery of a slave, he
is not obliged to warrant that he is sound, but he should warrant him not to be
liable for theft or damages; because he should
provide a slave such as the legatee may be permitted to retain. The health of a
slave, however, has nothing to do with the title to him, but the rule is
applicable where a slave has committed a theft or some damage for which he is
responsible, in order to prevent his master from retaining him; just as a tract
of land may happen to be liable for debts so that its owner cannot hold it.
(2) Where, however, a certain slave is bequeathed, he should be delivered such
as he is.
46. The Same, Epistles, Book IX.
What has been stated with reference to a legacy also applies to a person who
has promised to furnish either Stichus, or some other slave.
47. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXII.
Where property is bequeathed which belonged to the testator, and the heir has
possession of it, he ought not to delay, but should deliver it at once. If,
however, the property is elsewhere than where it is demanded, in the first
place it must be held that it shall be delivered where it was bequeathed,
unless the testator wished otherwise; for if this was the case, it should be
delivered in the place where the testator intended this should be done, or in
that which it is probable he had in mind.
Julianus gave this opinion not only with reference to property owned by the
testator, but where bequests are made of articles belonging to others. If,
however, the property has been left in one place and fraudulently transferred
by the heir to another, unless it is delivered where the demand is made, the
heir will be condemned on account of his bad faith; but where there was no bad
faith, the property shall be delivered in the place to which it was
transferred.
(1) Where a legacy of articles which can be weighed, counted, or measured is
demanded, and a specified quantity is bequeathed (as, for example, grain from a
certain granary, or wine from a designated warehouse), the article must be
delivered where it was left, unless the intention of the testator was
otherwise. But, if the bequest was not of a certain kind of property, it must
be delivered where the demand is made.
(2) Therefore, if Stichus should be bequeathed, and through the default of the
heir should not appear, the latter must pay his appraised value; but where he
was not at all to blame, the heir should provide for his restitution, and will
not be compelled to pay his value. But if the slave of another who had been
bequeathed takes to flight without the fault of the heir, the same rule will
apply; for the heir can become liable for negligence with reference to the
slave of another. The heir must, however, furnish security that if the slave
should be caught, he himself, or his value will be delivered. This also applies
to a slave captured by the enemy.
(3) But if Stichus or Pamphilus should be bequeathed, and one of them takes to
flight, or is captured by the enemy, it will be held
that if present, the slave must be delivered, or if absent, his appraised value
must be paid. The choice of these two things is granted to the heir only when
he is not guilty of delay in delivering him to the legatee. For this reason it
is established that if one of the two slaves should die, the other must, by all
means, be delivered, and perhaps also the price of the dead slave may be
payable. Where, however, both slaves have taken to flight, security is not
required of the heir, unless both of them come into his power; but where only
one of them does, he must deliver either the slave himself whom he has
recovered, or pay the appraised value of the one who is absent.
(4) The same rule applies where property belonging to another or to the estate
is destroyed, without the fault of the heir, or it is not produced; for he will
be obliged to do nothing more than give security. If, however, the property was
destroyed through the fault of the heir, judgment must be rendered against him
without delay.
(5) But let us consider in what way the neglect of the heir may be established;
must that which resembles fraud be merely taken into account, or that also
which is but slight negligence, or must exact diligence be required from the
heir? The latter I think to be the most correct opinion.
(6) Moreover, the same rule applies where land has been swallowed up by an
earthquake, and Labeo says that its appraised value will not be due. This
opinion is correct, if the catastrophe did not happen after the default of the
heir; for if the legatee had received it, he might have sold the land.
48. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book VI.
Where the slave of the heir has misappropriated the property bequeathed, and
sold it without the knowledge of his master, Atilicinus thinks that an action
in factumshould be granted the legatee, so that the master may be compelled to
surrender his slave in satisfaction for the damage, or pay out of the
peculiumof the latter what he received by the sale of the property.
(1) Where one of the heirs killed a slave, it does not seem to me that his co-
heir should be held liable in any respect, as it was not his fault that the act
was committed, and the property is no longer in existence.
49. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXIII.
Where property is bequeathed to anyone when he attains the age of fourteen
years, according to the rule in common use, the legatee must have fully
completed his fourteenth year; and this Marcellus states was decreed by the
Emperor.
(1) Therefore, where property is left to a legatee when he arrives at his
fourteenth year, payable in three different instalments in one, two, and three
years, and he has reached his seventeenth year at the time of the testator's
death, the legacy should all be paid at once. Hence, if the legatee has
attained his fifteenth year, we hold that the
legacy will be due after the lapse of two years; if he has reached his
sixteenth year, it will be due a year afterwards; if some months are lacking
before he reaches his seventeenth year, the legacy will be due after those
months have elapsed.
This, however, will be the case if the testator thought that the minor was
fourteen years of age when he made the bequest, when in fact he was more than
that, and if he was aware of it, we must calculate that the payment of the
legacy must be made three years after the date of the will.
(2) Again, this legacy is both conditional and dependent upon a certain time.
It is conditional until the legatee has passed his fourteenth year, and
afterwards it is dependent upon time.
(3) Therefore, if the legatee should die before attaining his fourteenth year,
nothing passes to his heir. It is certain that if he dies subsequently, the
property will pass to his heir. But if at the time that the will was made the
son should be under fourteen years of age, I think that the periods of one,
two, and three years, fixed for the payment, are to be computed from the time
when the legatee reached the age of fourteen years, unless it is clearly proved
that the intention of the testator was otherwise.
(4) If I should bequeath to Titius the sum of ten aurei,which I owe to someone
else, and request him to pay it to my creditor, the trust is not valid so far
as the creditor is personally concerned, because it is of no benefit to him;
still, my heir can bring an action against the legatee, on the ground that it
is to his interest for my creditor to be paid to prevent him from bringing
suit. Therefore the legacy will be valid.
(5) Where a testator owes me ten aureifor which he gave a surety, a demand for
the discharge of the trust cannot only be made by the heir, but also by the
surety; for it is to the interest of the latter that I should be paid, rather
than he should be sued, and then bring an action on mandate. It makes no
difference whether he is solvent or not.
(6) Julianus asks, in the Thirty-ninth Book of the Digest, if a surety
bequeaths to the creditor what he owes him, whether the legacy will be valid.
He says that this in no way benefits the creditor, but that the debtor will be
entitled to an action arising from the will, for it is to his interest to be
discharged from liability, although he cannot be sued by the heir of the
surety.
(7) But if the same surety makes a bequest to Titius, and charges him to pay
his creditor, both the debtor and the heir of the surety fan bring an action
against Titius, by virtue of the trust, because it is to the interest of both
of them that the trust should be discharged.
(8) It should also be remembered that a party who is charged merely with the
sale of a tract of land to someone cannot be required to give it to him, but
only to sell it for a reasonable price.
(9) Where, however, the heir was charged to sell the property for a certain
price, he is required to sell it for that price.
50. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XXIV.
Where a slave belongs to several masters, and a legacy is left to him, he will
acquire for each master a share of the legacy in proportion to his ownership of
him.
(1) If a judge having jurisdiction of the settlement of an estate should decide
that the heir did not conduct the case properly, or did not conduct it
seriously, this will not prejudice the legatees to any extent. But what if the
judge should render an unjust decision, and the heir should not appear? Any
injury done to him will not prejudice the legatees, as Sabinus holds. Let us,
however, consider if the judge should decide in favor of the substitute,
whether he will be liable to the legatees, and, as this decision is just with
reference to the substitute himself, can it not be said that he is liable to
the legatees, for he cannot be so dishonorable as to allege that the judge
decided in his favor through partiality. Hence the answer would be that he will
be liable to both the legatees and the creditors.
(2) Where an heir enters upon an estate before slaves of their murdered master
have been put to the question, or if he should not avenge the death of the
testator, the claims of the legatees can be presented to the Treasury. But what
if the Treasury should not accept the property? The burden of paying the
legatees will then necessarily fall back upon the heir. If, however, the heir
fraudulently presented an accuser of himself, in order that the estate might be
adjudged to him, and be free from all claims, or if he did not defend himself
as he should have done, he will not be released from liability, any more than a
party who litigates collusively with reference to an estate.
(3) Where a certain number of coins is bequeathed, and it is not apparent what
their denomination is, before anything else is done, the custom of the testator
himself, and afterwards that of the neighborhood must be ascertained, in order
to learn what he intended. And not only the intention of the testator, but also
the rank of the legatee, or the affection with which he was regarded, and his
wants must be considered; and the disposition of other sums by the same will,
which either precede or follow the above-mentioned bequest, should also be
taken into account.
51. Papinianus, Questions, Book IV.
If, however, the testator should bequeath certain specified coins, as, for
instance, such as he has in his chest, or a certain piece of plate, it is not
so much that a sum of money, as that the very coins themselves, or the articles
are bequeathed, for these cannot be changed, and they should be appraised, just
as if any other kind of property was involved.
52. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IV.
Where all the slaves of the testator, together with their peculiumare
bequeathed to anyone, those slaves also are due who have no peculium.
(1) Where a son under the age of puberty is charged with a legacy dependent
upon some condition, and he becomes his father's heir, and afterwards dies, it
can be said that the intention of the father who left the legacy to be
discharged by his son under a condition, and charged a substitute absolutely
with its payment, was that the legacy should be paid by the substitute without
delay, if his son should die before the condition was fulfilled.
53. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXV.
But what if he left a larger amount to be paid by the substitute? The amount in
excess would be what had been left to be paid by the substitute. This, in fact,
would be included with the sum mentioned in the former will, and therefore
would be due.
(1) If, however, the testator should repeat the legacy when he appointed the
substitute; for example, if he had charged the minor to deliver a tract of land
to me, and repeated this legacy charging the heir of the minor to deliver it to
me and Seius; the effect of this repetition will be that only a portion of the
land would be due to me.
(2) If anyone should appoint two heirs, and charge each one of them to deliver
an undivided piece of property to the legatee, this is the same as if the
legacy had been bequeathed by two different wills; for if a bequest is made to
me and to my son or to my slave, by the same will, both legacies will
undoubtedly be valid, as Marcellus has stated in his work on Julianus.
(3) Where the heir kills the slave that was bequeathed on account of some crime
which the latter has perpetrated, that is to say, because he deserved death, it
will, without doubt, be held that he is not liable under the will.
(4) If, however, he surrendered him in satisfaction for damage committed, will
he be liable because he could make reparation ? I think that he will be liable.
(5) But if he should kill an animal that had been bequeathed, I think he would
be liable, not only for the body of the dead animal, or any of its remains, but
to also pay the value which it would have had if living.
(6) Likewise, where the heir suffered a house which had been bequeathed to be
taken possession of, to avoid threatened injury; I think that he will be held,
for he ought to give security.
(7) Where the heir has interred a dead body in ground which was bequeathed, and
by so doing rendered it religious, if he buried his father there when he could
not bury him elsewhere, or could not do so as conveniently, he will not be
liable under the will. Will he, however, be liable for the price of the land?
If the testator desired to be buried in that place, the heir will not be liable
under the will. But of the heir buried him there on his own responsibility, he
will be obliged to pay the value of the land, if the assets of the estate are
sufficient to enable this to be done; for where a testator devises land, he
either intends to be buried elsewhere, or that the price of the land should be
paid to the legatee.
(8) If the heir himself did not kill the slave, but forced him to commit some
unlawful act, in order that he might be killed, or subjected to punishment by
someone else; it will be perfectly just for him to pay the price. The value of
the land, however, will not be due, if the slave committed the crime through
his own evil disposition.
(9) If the slave that was bequeathed should be captured by the enemy, without
fraud on the part of the heir; his delivery will not be required, but if this
was done fraudulently it will be required.
54. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book VIII.
Where legacies which imply disgrace, and an intention to insult the legatee
rather than to benefit him, are inserted into a will; they are considered as
not having been written, on account of the odium attaching to the testator.
(1) If a legacy is bequeathed to Titia, under the condition that she shall
marry with the approval of Seius, and Seius should die during the lifetime of
the testator, and she should marry, she will be entitled to the legacy.
(2) If a legacy has been bequeathed to you on condition that you manumit a
slave, and the death of the slave prevents his manumission, you will,
nevertheless, be entitled to the legacy, because it was not your fault that he
did not obtain his freedom. Where, in the bequest of a legacy, only a part of
the heirs are mentioned, the heirs will be charged with it equally, and if all
of them are charged, each will be liable in proportion to his share of the
estate.
55. The Same, On Sabinus, Book IX.
No one can provide in his will that laws affecting it shall not apply to the
same; for the reason that the obligation of the heir with reference to the
payment of legacies cannot be affected by time, place, or condition.
56. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XIV.
Where a legatee makes a stipulation on account of a slave that has been
bequeathed to him, the heir will not be obliged to produce the slave if he
should run away. The heir will not be bound by such a stipulation, for the
reason that the slave must be delivered just as he was when mentioned in the
will, nor is any injury understood to have been inflicted upon the legatee by
doing so.
57. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXIII.
Where property which was encumbered was bequeathed by a trust, if the testator
knew that it was encumbered, it must be released by the heir, unless the
testator intended otherwise. If he did not know this, the debt must be assumed
by the beneficiary, unless he can prove that if the testator knew that the
property was encumbered he would have left something else, or if it is probable
that something will remain after payment of the debt.
If, however, while it was not the intention of the testator that the burden of
releasing the lien on the land should be borne by his heirs,
he evidently did not think of relieving them of their responsibility; the
beneficiary of the trust can, by means of an exception on the ground of bad
faith, compel the creditors, if they bring an Hypothecary Action against him,
to assign their rights to him; and even though he may not have done this during
the time prescribed by law, still, this privilege will be accorded him by means
of the jurisdiction of the Governor of the province.
58. Papinianus, Opinions, Book IX.
Igave it as my opinion that where a house belonging to an estate was burned,
and was rebuilt with the money of the heir, on account of a trust by which the
said house was to be delivered to someone after the death of the heir, the
amount of the expense should be deducted in accordance with the estimate of a
reliable citizen, the age of the house having been taken into consideration:
59. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIII.
Provided the fire did not take place through the negligence of the heir.
60. Julianus, Digest, Book XXXIX.
If the heir should have delivered the house without retaining anything, an
action for the recovery of an indeterminate amount should lie in his favor,
just as if he had paid more than he owed.
61. Papinianus, Opinions, Book IX.
It was my opinion that the necessary expenses incurred by the legatee for the
repair of a house, where he claims the legacy and the condition upon which it
is dependent was afterwards fulfilled, should not be included in the
calculation.
62. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XLI.
Where a female slave is bequeathed, together with her children, the slave alone
will be due if there are no children; and the children alone, if the slave is
dead.
63. Celsus, Digest, Book XVII.
If a testator should bequeath all his female slaves and the children born of
them, and one of said slaves should die, Servius denies that her child is due,
for the reason that it was bequeathed by way of accessory. I think that this
opinion is incorrect, and that it is in accordance with neither the language
nor the intention of the deceased.
64. Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book XV.Documents procured by the schemes
of interested parties, in like manner, are invalid, where they have reference
to estates or legacies.
65. The Same, On the Edict of the Praetor, Concerning Legacies, Book I.
Where a bequest is made as follows: "I give to Seius ten slaves, to addition to
the ten which I have directly bequeathed to Titius."
Then if only ten are ascertained to belong to the estate, the legacy is void;
but if more than that number remain after Titius has selected his ten, the
legacy will be valid with respect to the others; but for no greater number than
the ten which were bequeathed. If less than ten should remain, the bequest will
be valid with reference to as many as are found.
(1) The bequest is conditional when expressed as follows, "I give Stichus to
So-and-So, if he is willing to accept him," and it does not pass to the heir,
unless the legatee is willing to take it; although, otherwise, where a legacy
is bequeathed without the addition, "If he wishes to accept," it will be
transferred to the heir of the legatee; for it is one thing in law where
something is tacitly included, and another where it is expressed in words.
(2) If a house should be bequeathed, even though it has been gradually rebuilt,
so that none of the original materials remain, we nevertheless say that the
legacy will be valid; but if, after the house has been torn down, the testator
should build another in its place, we must hold that the legacy is annulled,
unless it should be proved that the intention of the testator was otherwise.
66. The Same, On the Provincial Edict, Book XVIII.
If the testator directed his heir to purchase or sell a piece of property for a
reasonable price, the legacy is valid. But what if the legatee, from whom the
heir was directed to purchase the tract of land, should be compelled to sell it
through necessity, and was unable to find a purchaser; or, on the other hand,
if it would be greatly to the advantage of the legatee for him to purchase the
property, and the heir would not sell it to him, unless the testator had
ordered him to do so?
67. The Same, On the Edict of the Praetor, Concerning Legacies, Book I.
Where a slave is bequeathed to one of several heirs, and is said to have
maliciously committed some act against the estate, as, for instance, to have
removed the accounts; he shall not be adjudged to the heir before being put to
the torture, if the other heirs desire it. The same rule applies if he is
bequeathed to a stranger.
(1) Where the same property is bequeathed to two heirs out of several who have
been appointed for different shares, each of the heirs will be entitled to half
of the legacy, and not in proportion to their shares of the estate.
68. The Same, On the Provincial Edict, Book XVIII.
Where a bequest is made to a son after the death of his father, there is no
doubt that when his father dies the legacy will belong to the son; and it makes
no difference whether the legatee becomes the heir of his father or not.
(1) Where a legacy is bequeathed to a slave after the death of his master, if
he remains in the condition of servitude, the legacy will belong to the heir of
his master; and the same rule will apply if the
slave should be ordered to become free by the will of his master, for the time
of the bequest dates from the moment of the appearance of the heir; the result
of which is that the legacy will be acquired by the estate, and afterwards will
vest in him who is the heir; and, moreover, where someone is created either the
proper or the necessary heir of the master by his will, then, because the time
of the appearance of the heir and that appointed for the vesting of the legacy
coincide, it is held to be more probable that the legacy should belong to the
party to whom it was left than to the heir of him from whom the slave obtains
his freedom.
(2) If the slave should be bequeathed absolutely, and ordered to be free under
some condition, and the condition should not be fulfilled, the legacy will be
valid; and therefore if the condition should be fulfilled the legacy will be
annulled, but if it should fail the slave will belong to the legatee.
Therefore, if, while the condition upon which the freedom of the slave depends
is in suspense, the legatee should die, and the condition upon which the
freedom of the slave was dependent should fail, the legacy will not belong to
the heir of the legatee.
(3) If, indeed, the slave should be bequeathed conditionally, and ordered to be
free after the expiration of a certain time, the legacy is absolutely void,
because the day appointed will certainly arrive. Julianus also was of this
opinion.
(4) For this reason he says that if a slave was bequeathed to Titius, and was
ordered to be free after the death of Titius, the legacy is void, because it is
certain that Titius will die.
69. The Same, On the Edict of the Praetor Concerning Legacies.
It is accepted that a legacy can be bequeathed to a slave who has himself been
disposed of by will; because at the moment the estate is entered upon the slave
is acquired by the legatee, and then the legacy follows him.
(1) Where an heir alienates a slave under a certain condition, and the
condition is afterwards fulfilled, he can, nevertheless, be demanded by the
legatee, and the legacy is not extinguished.
(2) If a testator should direct some of his heirs to pay a debt, his creditors
will not be entitled to an action against them, but they can proceed against
the remaining co-heirs, as it is to their interest that this should be done. In
this instance, not only another party than the one to whom the testator ordered
property to be given will be entitled to an action, but others besides; as, for
example, if he should direct a dowry to be given to his son-in-law, or to the
man betrothed to his daughter, in her name. For neither the son-in-law nor the
betrothed will be entitled to an action, but the girl will be, as she has the
greatest interest in the matter.
(3) Where a tract of land which was devised is charged with a servitude, it
must be delivered in the condition in which it is. But if it is devised as
follows, "In the best possible condition," it must be delivered free from all
servitudes.
(4) Where a slave who was engaged in transacting the business of the testator
is bequeathed, he should not be delivered before he renders his accounts; and
if judicial proceedings are instituted to compel his delivery, the court shall
also take his accounts into consideration.
(5) Where there is some doubt whether the property left is in existence, for
example, if it should be uncertain whether a slave who has been bequeathed is
living, it has been decided that a testamentary action can be brought, and it
is the duty of the judge to compel the heir to furnish a bond by which he
agrees to search for the property, and if he finds it, deliver it to the
legatee.
70. The Same, On the Provincial Edict, Book XVIII.
If a slave belonging to Titius should steal something from me, and afterwards
Titius, having appointed me his heir, should bequeath the said slave to you, it
is not unjust that I should deliver to you the slave just as he was when in the
hands of Titius; that is to say, that you should indemnify me for the theft
which the slave committed while belonging to Titius.
(1) For, if a tract of land which was subject to a servitude for the benefit of
certain land of mine should be left to you, it should not be delivered to you
by me in any other way than subject to the former servitude.
(2) This case is not unlike the one where anyone purchases a slave from someone
by the mandate of another, or gives back to the former owner a slave which he
had purchased with the right to return him; for persons are not compelled to
restore a slave under such circumstances, unless indemnity was promised for a
theft committed by said slave either before the transaction was entered into or
subsequently.
(3) Therefore, if a slave who was bequeathed steals something from the heir,
after his acceptance of the estate, the latter will be obliged to deliver the
slave in such a way that the legatee will receive from the heir the amount
which he could have recovered from him by an action growing out of the crime
committed by the slave.
71. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LI.
Where a house has simply been left to someone, and it is not stated what house,
the heirs will be compelled to give to the legatee any house belonging to the
testator which the legatee may select. If, however, the testator did not leave
any house, the legacy is ridiculous rather than valid.
(1) Let us consider whether, where anyone delivers a slave by virtue of a
legacy, he should furnish security against eviction, and, generally speaking,
it must be held that whenever property given by a legacy has been delivered,
and the possessor is evicted, the legatee can bring suit for it under the terms
of the will. If, however, a demand is made for the property in court, it is the
duty of the judge to require a bond, so that an action may be brought under the
stipulation.
(2) Where money has been bequeathed, and the heir acknowledges that it is due,
a reasonable time must be granted him in which to pay it; and he should not be
compelled to bring the matter into court. The Praetor must fix a time for
payment, in accordance with what is equitable and just.
(3) Where a man acknowledges that he is indebted, but gives a good reason why
he cannot deliver what is due, he should be heard; for instance, where property
belonging to another has been bequeathed, and he alleges that the owner of the
same refuses to sell it; or where he says that an exorbitant price is demanded
for the property; or where he declines to give up a slave belonging to the
estate, because the said slave is either his father, his mother, or one of his
brothers; for it is perfectly just that under these circumstances he should be
permitted by the court to pay the appraised value of the property.
(4) Where a cup has been bequeathed to anyone, and the heir desires to pay the
appraised value of the same, because he says it would be a hardship for him to
be deprived of it, he cannot obtain this favor from the Praetor, because the
condition of a slave is one thing, and that of other property is another, and
the more indulgent course is adopted with reference to slaves, as we have
previously
stated.
(5) Where property belonging to a municipality, together with its municipal
taxes, is bequeathed, let us consider whether the legacy is valid, and can
legally be claimed. Julianus says in the Thirty-eighth Book of the Digest that,
although land of this kind may belong to a municipality, still, because the
party who bequeathed it had some right therein, the legacy will be valid.
(6) But if the testator had devised this land to others than to the
municipality from which he had leased it, he is not considered to have left the
ownership of the same, but only the right which he had in the rent of the land.
72. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XLVIII.
If anyone should bequeath the Cornelian Estate, with the exception of the
vineyards which were there at the time of his death, and there are no vineyards
there, nothing will be deducted from the legacy.
73. Gaius, On the Edict of the Praetor, Concerning Legacies.
Where an heir is directed to act in such a way that Lucius may obtain a hundred
aurei,the heir will be compelled to pay that sum; because no one can act in
such a way that I may obtain a hundred aureiunless he gives them to me.
(1) It is stated in a Rescript of Our Emperor that legacies bequeathed to
villages, as well as those bequeathed to cities, are lawful.
74. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book IV.
Although Our Emperor and his father stated in a Rescript that, where property
was ordered to be delivered by the appointed heir, this, according to the
intention of the testator, also applied to the substi-
tute; still, it must be understood in this way, only where it is clear that the
intention of the testator was not otherwise. It can be ascertained in several
ways whether; where his heir was charged with the payment of a legacy or trust,
he was unwilling for the substitute to be charged with it. But what if he had
charged the substitute with the delivery of other property to the beneficiary
of the trust, or to the legatee, with which he had not charged the appointed
heir? Or what course should be pursued if a good reason existed why the
appointed heir should be charged with the legacy, and the substitute should not
? Or what should be done if he had substituted the beneficiary, to whom he had
left property in trust, to be delivered by his appointed heirs?
It must therefore be said that the above-mentioned Rescript does not apply,
except where the intention of the testator is obscure.
75. The Same, Disputations, Book V.
Where a legacy or a trust is left as follows: "If my heir should deem it
proper, if he should approve of it, if he should consider it just;" the legacy
or the trust will be due; since it was entrusted to him as to a man of
character, and the validity of the bequest was not dependent upon the mere
consent of the heir.
(1) Where, "what Titius owes," is left to me, and Titius does not owe anything,
it should be noted that the bequest is void. And, also, if the amount is not
stated, nothing will be due, for the good and sufficient reason that it is not
apparent how much was bequeathed. For if I bequeath to Titius what I owe him,
and do not mention the amount, it is settled that the bequest is void; but if I
should bequeath to Titius ten aureithat I owe him, although I may not owe him
anything, the false representation does not annul the legacy; as Julianus
decided in the case of the bequest of a dowry.
(2) If the testator had said, "I bequeath the ten aureiwhich Titius owes me,"
the legacy will undoubtedly be void, for a great deal of difference exists
between a false representation and a false condition, or cause. Hence, if I
should bequeath to Titius ten aureiwhich Seius owes me, the legacy will be void
if he owes me nothing, because he should be my debtor. If, however, he did owe
me, and I should collect the debt during my lifetime, the legacy will be
extinguished; and if he should remain my debtor, my heir will only be compelled
to assign to him his right of action.
(3) If anyone should stipulate "To give Stichus, or ten aurei,whichever I may
choose," and bequeaths what was due to the legatee, his heir will be required
to assign his right of action to the legatee, and the latter will have the
right to choose Stichus or the ten aurei,whichever he may prefer.
(4) Hence, if he should bequeath Stichus, while he owed him either Stichus or
the ten aurei,an action for an indeterminate amount will lie in favor of the
legatee against the heir, as Julianus stated in the Thirty-third Book of the
Digest; and by means of this action he can compel the heir to institute
proceedings; and if, after having brought suit, he should recover Stichus, the
heir must deliver him to the lega-
tee, but if he should pay the ten aurei,he will recover nothing. Therefore, it
is in the power of the debtor to determine whether he to whom Stichus was
bequeathed shall be a legatee or not.
76. Julianus, Digest, Book XXXIV.
If anyone should stipulate to deliver Stichus or Pamphilus, and then should
bequeath Stichus to Sempronius, and Pamphilus to Maevius; the heir is understood
to be required to pay the value of Stichus or Pamphilus to one of the legatees,
and to assign his right of action to the other.
77. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book V.
Where money is deposited with anyone, and afterwards he is charged, as trustee,
to pay the said money to the beneficiary, the trust must be executed, according
to a Rescript of the Divine Pius; as it is held that the heir was requested to
pay the money to the debtor. For if the debtor should be sued by the heir, he
can avail himself of an action on the ground of bad faith, which renders the
trust valid; and since this is the case, every debtor can be charged with a
trust.
78. The Same, Disputations, Book VIII.
Where a legatee is charged with a trust, he is only bound to carry it out if
the property bequeathed comes into his hands.
79. Julianus, Digest, Book V.
Where anyone, by his will, orders ten aureito be paid to Titius and Seius,
these words are in no way ambiguous; as the testator, when he mentioned ten, is
understood to have said that ten aureishould be given to each of the legatees.
80. Marcellus, Notes On the Digest of Julianus, Book XXXII.
A man who left an estate of only thirty aureibequeathed thirty to Titius,
twenty to Seius, and ten to Maevius.
Massurius Sabinus holds that Titius is entitled to fifteen, Seius to ten, and
Maevius to five aurei;provided, however, that each legatee contributes his share
of the Falcidian fourth in proportion to what was bequeathed to him.
81. Julianus, Digest, Book XXXII.
Where an heir has been charged to deliver a tract of land under a condition,
and while the condition is pending leaves it to a third party under another
condition, and then the condition prescribed by the former will is fulfilled,
and afterwards the condition under which the heir bequeathed said property is
complied with; the ownership of the same is not lost by the first legatee.
(1) Where property is bequeathed to a slave owned in common by two masters, one
of them can accept the legacy, and the other can reject it; for, in this
instance, a slave owned in common occupies the place of two separate and
distinct slaves.
(2) "I give and bequeath Stichus to Sempronius; if Sempronius does not manumit
Stichus within a year, I give and bequeath the said Stichus to Titius." The
question arose, what effect did this have in law? I answered that, in the
meantime, Sempronius would be entitled to the entire slave, and if he should
manumit him within a year, the slave will become free, but if he does not do
this, the entire slave will belong to Titius.
(3) Where a testator devises a tract of land, with the exception of the
building, by the term "building" is understood either the edifice or the soil
upon which it was erected in addition. If he excepts only the building itself,
the entire tract of land can, nevertheless, be claimed by the terms of the
legacy; but if the heir files an exception on the ground of bad faith, he can
obtain permission to live in the house as well as acquire a right of way
through the land to obtain access to it.
Where, however, the ground was excepted, the land with the exception of the
house can be claimed, and a servitude will, by operation of law, attach to it
for the benefit of the house; just as where an owner bequeaths one of two
tracts of land and subjects the other to a servitude in its favor.
The probability is, however, that in a case of this kind, the testator had also
in view the ground on which the house was built, and without which it could not
stand.
(4) If a freedman should appoint his patron heir to seven-twelfths of his
estate, and other persons heirs to the remainder, and make his bequest as
follows: "I charge whoever of the above-mentioned persons will be my heirs,
along with my patron, to deliver such-and-such slaves to Titius, which slaves I
think to be worth twenty aureiapiece;" it must be understood that the co-heir
of the patron is the only one charged with the legacy, and therefore that
Titius can only claim five-twelfths of the slaves.
But the following addition: "Whom I think to be worth twenty aureiapiece," does
not change the condition of the bequest, if allowance be made for the
proportion due under the Falcidian Law, for in order that this may be done, the
true value of the slaves must, nevertheless, be deducted, when they are
appraised.
(5) "I give and bequeath a tract of land to Titius, if he pays ten aureito my
heir." If my heir owes Titius ten aurei,and Titius gives him a receipt for the
amount, he can claim the land.
(6) If Titius, to whom Stichus was bequeathed, should die before he learned
that the legacy belonged to him, and should bequeath the same slave to Seius,
and the heir of Titius does not reject the legacy, Seius can claim Stichus as
his property.
If the head of a household should charge his minor son with the delivery of a
tract of land, which he left to Titius, and should charge a substitute in the
same manner for the same person, and the minor should become the heir of his
father, whether Titius claims the legacy or rejects it, he cannot demand
anything from the substitute, even though the son should die before reaching
puberty; for when a legacy
is bequeathed a second time, and the substitute is charged therewith, it should
be considered that the legacy is only repeated.
(7) Wherefore, if the son was absolutely, and the substitute conditionally,
charged with the legacy, the case will be the same as if the son alone was
charged with it. And, on the other hand, if the son was charged with it
conditionally, and the substitute absolutely, and the minor should die before
the condition was fulfilled, the legacy will be valid solely by virtue of the
substitution.
(8) A bequest made as follows: "I give and bequeath a tract of land to Lucius
and Titius, or to one of them," is valid, and if both of them live, it will be
due to both, but if only one lives, he will be entitled to it.
(9) Where a slave who is to be free under a condition is bequeathed under
another condition, and while the condition of the bequest is pending, the other
condition upon which his liberty is dependent fails to be carried out, the
legacy is valid; for, as a conditional grant of freedom annuls the legacy if
the condition is fulfilled; so also the legacy cannot be annulled before the
time when it is to take effect shall have arrived.
(10) Where a minor son is charged with the legacy of a slave, and his
substitute is directed to set him free, and the minor arrives at puberty, the
slave can be claimed by the party to whom he was bequeathed. If, however, the
minor should die, the slave will obtain his freedom. There would be much more
reason for this to be observed, if the slave had been bequeathed conditionally
in charge of the minor, and, while the condition was pending the son should die
before reaching the age of puberty.
82. Julianus, Digest, Book XXXIII.
The obligation attaching to a legacy is not always extinguished where the
property vests to the legatee on the day prescribed, but it must vest in him in
such a way that he cannot be deprived of it. Let us suppose that certain
property that has been left to me absolutely, has been delivered to me by the
heir upon the day appointed, and that the heir was also charged to deliver the
said property to another subject to a certain condition; I can undoubtedly
bring an action under the terms of the will, because the circumstances are such
that I shall lose the ownership of the property if the condition is fulfilled.
For, if Stichus is due to me under a stipulation, and he is bequeathed to
someone else under a condition, he will become mine, because of the
consideration; still, if the condition is fulfilled, I will be entitled to
bring an action based on the stipulation.
(1) If I have acquired, by prescription, some property belonging to a person
who is absent on public business, and it is bequeathed to me before I have been
deprived of it by a better title, and then, afterwards, I should be deprived of
it in this way, I can legally bring an action under the will and compel the
said property to be delivered to me.
(2) Where a tract of land has been bequeathed to me, and I have acquired the
mere ownership of the same without the usufruct, and the vendor afterwards
forfeits his civil rights, the usufruct will belong to me.
If I bring an action under the will, the court will render a judgment of the
amount that I have lost through litigation.
(3) Marcellus: The same rule will apply if I purchase a part of said land, and
the said part is either bequeathed or given to me; for I have a right to bring
suit for a part.
(4) Julianus: If the children born of Pamphila are bequeathed to me, and I have
bought Pamphila, and she has a child while under my control; it cannot be held
that I am entitled to said child, for a valid consideration, simply because I
purchased its mother. The proof of this is, that if I should be evicted I will
be entitled to an action against the vendor on the ground of purchase.
(5) Where a testator, having Gaius and Lucius his debtors for the same sum of
money, made a bequest as follows: "Let my heir give to Sempronius what Gaius
owes me, and to Maevius what Lucius owes me," he imposes upon his heir the
necessity of assigning his rights of action to one of his legatees, and the
amount of the claim due from them to the other. If, however, the testator,
during his lifetime, had given a receipt to Gaius, the legacy bequeathed to
Sempronius and Maevius will necessarily be void.
(6) Where Stichus and Pamphilus were bequeathed to me by two different wills,
and I have received Stichus under the terms of another will, I can bring an
action under the first to recover Pamphilus; for if Stichus and Pamphilus had
been bequeathed to me by one will, and I had obtained Stichus for a good
consideration, I could, nevertheless, claim Pamphilus.
83. Marcellus, Digest, Book XIII.
Titius bequeathed to you a share in Stichus, and Seius bequeathed to you the
remaining share in Stichus, you can then claim him by virtue of both wills.
84. Julianus, Digest, Book XIII.
A bequest of this kind, "Let my heir pay a hundred aureito Titius, if Titius
will furnish my heir with security that he will pay a hundred aureito Maevius,"
will be valid; just as where a legacy is bequeathed to anyone and he delivered
it to another in compliance with the terms of a trust.
(1) The following legacy is valid for the same reason: "Let my heir pay a
hundred aureito Titius, if Titius gives him security to construct a public work
of this value in the City."
(2) If Sempronius should appoint Titius his heir, and direct him to transfer a
tract of land belonging to his estate to Maevius, after the lapse of two years;
and Titius should then charge his heir to deliver the same land at once to
Maevius, and Maevius receives the price of the land from the heir of Titius, and
he afterwards wishes to claim
the land under the will of Sempronius; he will be barred by an exception, if he
is not satisfied with the price paid for said land.
(3) Where a slave was bequeathed by someone in general terms, and it was the
legatee's fault that he did not receive Stichus when the heir wished to deliver
him, and Stichus should die, the heir can avail himself of an exception on the
ground of bad faith.
(4) Where a house, in whose favor another house belonging to the heir was
charged with a servitude was delivered to the legatee without the servitude, I
held that the latter can bring an action under the will, because he did not
receive the entire legacy.
And, indeed, if the legatee should receive from the heir a slave, who had
become disabled, he can very properly bring an action under
the will.
(5) Where a man, not being aware that a slave had been bequeathed to him by a
will, purchases the said slave from the heir, and then, after having
ascertained this, he brings an action under the will and recovers the slave, he
should be released from liability to suit on account of the sale; because this
proceeding is one of good faith, and hence includes an exception on the ground
of fraud.
If, however, the price having been paid, he should bring suit under the will,
he ought to recover the slave, and he can recover the price by an action on
purchase, if he is deprived of him by a better title. But if he should proceed
by an action on purchase, and should then ascertain that the slave had been
bequeathed to him, and bring suit under the will; the heir cannot be released
unless he refunds the price, and surrenders the slave to the purchaser.
(6) Where a father promised a hundred aureias dowry for his daughter, and
afterwards bequeathed the same amount to her, the heir will be protected by an
action on the ground of bad faith, if the son-in-law institutes proceedings on
account of the promise of the deceased, and the daughter brings suit under the
will; for they should agree with one another to be content with one of these
actions.
(7) Where a bequest is made as follows: "Let my heir pay ten aureito So-and-So,
if he returns my promissory note to my heir," a condition of this kind has the
effect of releasing my heir from the debt. Wherefore, if the note is in
existence, the creditor will not be understood to have complied with the
condition, unless he gives the heir a receipt. If, however, the note is not in
existence, he is held to have complied with the condition, if he releases the
heir. It makes no difference whether the note was destroyed at the time that
the will was made, or subsequently, or after the death of the testator.
(8) If Stichus, who belongs to Titius, is bequeathed to Titius and Maevius,
Maevius will be entitled to a half interest in Stichus, for Titius is entitled
to half of said slave even though he may not be allowed to receive a legacy.
(9) "Let my heir give to Titius, Stichus, or Pamphilus, whichever one he
chooses." If the heir should say that he wishes to give Stichus, and Stichus
should die, he will be released; but if he should mention at any time which one
he wishes to give, he cannot change his mind.
(10) A legacy was bequeathed as follows: "Let my heir transfer to Titius the
Cornelian Estate and the slaves who are on said estate, and who will be mine at
the time of my death." A female slave who ordinarily remained on said estate,
at the time of the testator's death had fled, and brought forth a child. I
asked whether she herself and her child are included in the legacy. I answered
that the slave seems to have been bequeathed, even though she has taken to
flight, and even if she was a fugitive, she is considered to have been on said
estate at the time of the testator's death. Consequently, as the child follows
the condition of the mother, it is included in the legacy, just as if it had
been born on the estate.
(11) If either Stichus or Pamphilus, whichever one of them the legatee prefers,
was bequeathed to Titius, and the testator gave Pamphilus to Titius, Stichus is
still subject to the obligation.
(12) Where a legacy was bequeathed as follows: "I do give and bequeath to
Titius and Maevius each a slave," it is established that they do not have joint
rights in the same slave, just as they would not have if the bequest was in the
following terms: "I give and bequeath a slave to Titius, and another slave to
Maevius."
(13) Where a person to whom a legacy was bequeathed, before he decides what
action he will make use of to recover his legacy, dies, leaving two heirs, and
both of them appear to accept the legacy at the same time, they cannot receive
it unless they agree as to the course to be pursued; as for instance, where one
of them wishes to bring a real, and the other a personal action. If, however,
they should agree, they will be entitled to the property in common, and they
should agree either voluntarily, or by the direction of the court.
85. Paulus, On Plautius, Book XI.
Atract of land was devised to two persons conjointly; one of them, by a
personal action, obtained the appraised value of half the property, the other,
if he desired to bring suit for all the land, can be barred by an exception on
the ground of bad faith with reference to half of it; because the deceased
wished the legacy to come into their hands only once.
86. Julianus, Digest, Book XXXIV.
If a slave whom you had given in pledge is bequeathed to you by some other
party, you will be entitled to an action under the will against the heir if the
pledge is released.
(1) If one of the heirs of a testator is charged to deliver Stichus to Maevius
by way of legacy, and then all his heirs are charged by a codicil to deliver
the same Stichus to him, and, before the codicil is opened, Maevius should
receive the appraised value of the slave, he cannot legally obtain the slave
under the codicil, because the testator intended he should receive the legacy
but once.
(2) Where a slave is bequeathed, and the condition of said slave and of
everything relating to him personally are in suspense, and the legatee should
refuse the legacy, the slave is considered never to have
belonged to him; and if he should not reject him, he is understood to be his
from the day of the acceptance of the estate.
In accordance with this rule, and the rights of those interested in property
which the slave either received by delivery or stipulated for, as well as with
reference to whatever was bequeathed or given to him, his condition will be
determined; and also whether the business he transacted was for the benefit of
the heir, or the legatee.
(3) Where all the heirs of a testator are charged with the delivery of a tract
of land, which belonged to one of them, he to whom it belonged is not required
to furnish more than his share, and the others will be liable for the remaining
shares.
(4) If a house is left to him on whose ground the building stands, the legacy
will be valid, even though he is the owner of the land; for by this means he
obtains a release from the servitude and profits by the gift of the house.
87. Papinianus, Questions, Book XVIII.
A father having appointed his son, over whom he retained control, heir to a
portion of his estate, also left him a legacy. It would be a very great
hardship, as some authorities hold, that his right to the legacy should be
denied if he rejected his father's estate, for the will should not be
considered as attacked by one who, for good reasons, refuses to be involved in
the affairs of an estate which may be insolvent.
88. Marcianus, Institutes, Book VI.
If, however, the father intended that the son should not have the legacy unless
he accepted the estate, then an action should not be granted him against his
co-heir for the recovery of the legacy, as is held by Aristo; since the estate
did not appear to be solvent to the son himself.
This is the case, even if the testator did not make the acceptance of the
estate conditional, as it is clearly established what his intention was.
89. Julianus, Digest, Book XXXIII.
For an emancipated son, if he rejects the estate, cannot be prevented from
claiming the legacy from the heir. The Praetor, by permitting those children who
are under the control of their father to reject his estate, makes it plain that
he intends to grant them the same right so far as they are personally
concerned, to which they would have been entitled if they had had free power to
enter upon the estate.
90. Papinianus, Questions, Book XVIII.
But what if the legacy was bequeathed as follows: "I bequeath this to my son in
addition" ? There is no doubt that inquiry must be made as to the intention of
the testator. This instance is not unlike the former one relating to previous
knowledge of the son, unless it is clearly proved that the intention of the
father was otherwise.
(1) It is evident that if several sons have been appointed heirs, an action to
recover the legacy will be refused to him who declined to accept the estate.
91. Julianus, Digest, Book XXXVI.
The question arose whether a son under paternal control, who himself had a son,
should be appointed heir; as both of them are under the control of another, for
can a son be charged with a legacy for the benefit of his own son? I answered
that as a son can be charged with a legacy in favor of his father, it follows
that he can be charged with one for the benefit of his brother, or his son, or
even for the benefit of his father's slave.
(1) Where freedom is granted to a slave at once, a legacy can be bequeathed to
him either absolutely or conditionally. But where freedom has been bestowed
upon him under some condition, it can at certain times be valid, and at others,
even if bequeathed absolutely, it may be void; for if the condition of freedom
was such that it could be fulfilled immediately on the death of the testator,
before the estate was entered upon (for instance, "Let Stichus be free if he
pays ten aureito Titius, or ascends to the Capitol"), the legacy will be valid.
Moreover, conditions like the following: "If he pays the heir ten aureiif he
should ascend to the Capitol after my estate has been accepted," the legacy
will be void. Where, however, a necessary heir has been appointed for the
entire estate, those conditions which could be complied with before the estate
was entered upon render the legacy invalid.
(2) Where a testator appointed two heirs, and bequeathed Stichus to one, and
ten aureito Stichus, if Stichus becomes free during the lifetime of the
testator, he will be entitled to the entire legacy; and a proof that it vests
in the said slave personally is established by the fact that if the heir to
whom the slave had been bequeathed should not enter upon the estate, he can
recover the entire legacy from the other heir.
(3) Where a legacy is bequeathed to a slave, who himself is bequeathed, and he
is sold by the testator, the legacy will belong to the purchaser.
(4) Where a slave is left to Titius, and the legacy is bequeathed to the same
slave, the legatee can be charged with the trust, "Either to deliver the slave
to someone, or to transfer to him the property which is bequeathed to the
slave." And, even more than this, Titius can be charged with the trust with
reference to the slave himself, even after he shall become free.
(5) If anyone should bequeath Stichus, and then sell or manumit him, and
subsequently should leave him a legacy by a codicil, either the manumitted
slave or the purchaser will be entitled to the legacy.
(6) If you should be appointed an heir by a party who has charged you to
deliver a slave, and some individual should bequeath a legacy to the said
slave; and, during the lifetime of the person who bequeathed me the slave, the
day for the transfer of the legacy to the slave arrives; that legacy is at once
acquired by the estate. Hence, even though the person who bequeathed me the
slave should die, the legacy left to the slave will not belong to me.
(7) Where a slave is claimed by virtue of a will, he should be delivered to the
plaintiff in the same condition in which he was at the
time issue was joined in the case. And, as the offspring of a female slave, as
well as the crops of the land which have been obtained, in the meantime, are
included in this action; therefore any property which meanwhile has been
acquired by the slave either by bequest or inheritance must be delivered to the
plaintiff.
92. Julianus, Digest, Book XXXIX.
Where one of several heirs purchases a tract of land which has been left in
trust, the price having been determined by the income from said land on account
of the debts due from the estate; the party entitled to the land under the
terms of the trust, being present, and consenting, it is settled that not the
land itself, but the value of the same should be delivered.
Marcellus states in a note, "If the heir should prefer to deliver the land, I
think that he should be heard."
(1) Julianus: Where money is bequeathed to Titius, and he is charged by a trust
to manumit a slave belonging to another, and the master of said slave is
unwilling to sell him; he will, nevertheless, be entitled to his legacy,
because it was not his fault that the property bequeathed by the trust was not
delivered. For if the slave should die, he will not be deprived of his legacy.
(2) Just as it is conceded that a trust can be imposed upon anyone who is
entitled to an estate as the lawful heir, or to praetorian possession of it, so
he who, by law, has a right to the estate of a boy under the age of puberty, or
to praetorian possession of the same, can be legally charged with a trust.
93. Ulpianus, Trusts, Book I.
Atrust of this kind will only be valid where the minor dies under the age of
puberty; if, however, he should die after having reached puberty, the trust
will vanish.
94. Julianus, Digest, Book XXXIX.
It is clear that if a father should disinherit his son while under the age of
puberty, the heir-at-law cannot be compelled to discharge the trust, unless he
was also the heir of the father.
(1) Where a master was asked to deliver to another person an estate to which
his own slave had been appointed heir, and he sold the slave; the question
arose whether he into whose hands the estate came through the purchase of the
slave, that was appointed heir, can be compelled to surrender it. I said that a
person who sold his own slave that had been appointed heir could be compelled
to discharge the trust, as he had received the price of the estate which he was
asked to surrender.
He, however, into whose hands the estate came through the purchase of the slave
that had been appointed heir, can, after investigation, be forced to discharge
the trust; that is to say, in case the original master of the slave was not
solvent.
(2) Where Stichus, or Damas, was bequeathed to someone, and the legatee was
given his choice, and he was charged to deliver
Stichus to someone else; and although he may have preferred to demand Damas he
will, nevertheless, be required to deliver Stichus, in accordance with the
terms of the trust. Even if Damas is of greater value, he will be compelled to
furnish Stichus; or if he is of less value, he will also legally be required to
deliver him; since it was his fault that he did not, in accordance with the
terms of the will, obtain the slave who was the object of the trust.
(3) Where a slave is manumitted by will, and does not receive either a legacy
or the estate, he cannot be compelled to discharge a trust. Neither can he do
so who is requested to manumit a slave that was bequeathed to him; for a person
can only be compelled to pay money by virtue of a trust who receives something
of the same kind, or similar to it, by the will.
95. Ulpianus, Trusts, Book I.
Nevertheless, it should be considered where a slave who was manumitted was
asked to furnish something in lieu of labor, whether a trust of this kind will
be valid. This can by no means be admitted, because services of this
description cannot be imposed on a freedman, and if imposed, they cannot be
exacted; even though the testator may have provided for it in his will.
96. Julianus, Digest, Book XXXIX.
A certain individual made the following bequest in his will, or codicil: "I
desire forty aureito be paid to Pamphila, as is hereinafter stated; so many of
which are due to me from Julius; and so many which I have invested in camp
equipage; and so many which I have in cash." The testator died several years
afterwards being still of the same mind, but all the sums which he mentioned
had been employed for other purposes.
I ask whether the trust must be discharged. I answered that it was very
probable that the testator had intended rather to point out to his heirs where
they could readily obtain forty aurei,without interfering with the remainder of
his estate, than to have inserted a condition in a trust which in the beginning
had been absolute; and therefore that Pamphila was entitled to the forty aurei.
(1) Whenever property without an owner reverts to the Treasury under the Julian
Law, the legacies and trusts which the heir, to whom they were left, was
compelled to pay and discharge, must be paid and discharged by the Treasury.
(2) If a slave is bequeathed to you, and you are requested "To deliver to
Titius property equal to the value of the slave," and then the slave should
die, you will not be compelled to deliver anything by reason of the trust.
(3) Where an heir appointed for a certain share of an estate is charged, as
follows: "Take a certain sum as a preferred legacy, and distribute it among
those who have received legacies by the will," he must take in this manner what
was conditionally bequeathed, after the condition has been complied with, and,
in the meantime, he will
be required to give security either to the heir, or to the parties to whom the
conditional legacies have been left.
(4) Where a slave, who is to be free under a certain condition, is ordered to
pay money to someone, he who is entitled to it can be requested to deliver the
said money to another party. For, as the testator can grant freedom to his
slave absolutely, by means of a codicil, and in this way dispose of the
condition, why should he not have the power to take away the same money by
means of a trust?
97. The Same, Digest, Book XLII.
If Stichus should be bequeathed to me, and I should be charged, "To deliver
either Stichus, or Pamphilus, my slave," and I lose anything on account of the
legacy through the operation of the Falcidian Law, I shall be obliged to give
my slave Pamphilus entirely to Titius, or that share in Stichus which I have
received by way of legacy.
98. The Same, Digest, Book LII.
A slave who has been taken by the enemy can legally be bequeathed, for this is
derived from the right of postliminium;since, just as we can appoint a slave
who is in the hands of the enemy our heir, so also, we can bequeath him as a
legacy.
99. The Same, Digest, Book LXX.
Where Stichus was bequeathed to a master, and a bequest was also made by the
testator to one of the slaves of the former, giving him the choice between
Stichus and another slave, I hold that only half of Stichus would belong to the
aforesaid master, because the said slave, if manumitted, could select Stichus.
100. The Same, Digest, Book LXXV1I.
If Sempronius should charge his heir Titius with a legacy in my favor, and
Titius should bequeath the same property to me subject to the same condition,
and the condition should be complied with, I can still claim the legacy under
the will of Sempronius.
101. The Same, Digest, Book LXXVIII.
If Stichus is bequeathed by will to one of my slaves, and I reject the legacy;
and afterwards, a codicil having been produced, it becomes apparent that
Stichus was bequeathed to me also, I can, nevertheless, claim him.
(1) Where a legacy is left to a person who is in the hands of the enemy, and he
dies while there; the legacy will be of no force or effect, although it can be
confirmed by the right of postliminium.
102. The Same, Digest, Book LXXXI.
Where a minor of twenty years manumits his slave without the required legal
investigation, and afterwards bequeaths a legacy to said slave, and the latter,
having been sold, obtains his liberty; he cannot receive the legacy, for it is
of no force or effect as it was bequeathed without the grant of freedom.
103. The Same, Digest, Book LXXXIII.
Fraud is held to have been committed in the case of an implied trust, whenever
the trustee is not requested to perform any act either by a will, or by a
codicil, but merely binds himself by a private agreement, or by a memorandum,
that he will discharge the trust in favor of a party who is not entitled to
profit by it.
104. The Same, On Urseius Ferox, Book I.
Where all the heirs of a testator were charged with a legacy as follows: "Let
whoever becomes my heir be charged with the payment of a hundred aureito
Titius." It was afterwards inserted in the will that only one of his heirs
should pay Titius the money. The question arose, must the remaining heirs pay
the entire hundred aurei,or what is left after deducting the share of the
estate belonging to the one above mentioned? The answer was that it was more
advisable for the remaining heirs to pay the hundred aurei,since the meaning of
the words is not opposed to this opinion, and the intention of the testator
agrees with it.
(1) Where the following was inserted in a will: "Let my heir pay a hundred
aureito Lucius Titius, if he surrenders to him a note by which I have promised
to pay him a certain sum of money." Titius died before delivering the note to
the heir; and the question arose whether his heir would be entitled to the
legacy?
Cassius gave it as his opinion that if there was, in reality, a note, the heir
of the legatee would not be entitled to the legacy, because, as the note was
not returned, the time for the legacy to vest had not arrived. Julianus remarks
that, if there was no note in existence at the time when the will was executed,
there was one reason why the legacy would be due to Titius, and that is because
an impossible condition is not considered to have been imposed.
(2) Sabinus says that property which belongs to the enemy can be bequeathed,
if, under any circumstances, it can be purchased.
(3) Where property was bequeathed to Attius, as follows, "Let whoever becomes
my heir be charged to pay ten aureito my heir, Attius," Attius can claim the
ten aurei,after the deduction of his share from the amount.
(4) Likewise, where an heir has been ordered to pay ten aureiand retain a tract
of land for himself, he must pay that sum after having deducted his share.
(5) Finally, it is established that where a legacy has been bequeathed as
follows, "Let whoever becomes my heir be charged to pay my heir ten aurei,"the
shares of all the heirs will be equal, for the reason that each of them is held
to be charged for his own benefit, as well as for that of his co-heirs.
(6) Where anyone appoints an heir as follows, "Whenever his mother shall die,"
and then a second heir is appointed as his substitute, and the latter is
charged with a legacy in favor of the one who was conditionally appointed, and
the first one dies during the lifetime of his mother, and afterwards, the day
on which the legacy is to vest
arrives, the question arises whether his heir will be entitled to the legacy.
The better opinion is that he will be entitled to it, whether the substitute
was charged to pay it to the first heir absolutely, or under the condition that
he should not become his heir; for the condition was fulfilled at the time of
the death of the appointed heir.
(7) Where a father-in-law was appointed heir to his son-in-law, and part of the
estate was bequeathed to another, Sabinus gave it as his opinion that after the
dowry had been deducted, he would be liable for the share of the estate
included in the legacy; just as if a sum of money had been due to the father-
in-law from the son-in-law, and after this was deducted, he had surrendered the
estate.
105. The Same, On Minicius, Book I.
Where a legacy was bequeathed as follows: "Let my heir be charged with the
payment to Cornelius of what Lucius Titius owes me," the heir is not required
to transfer anything under this legacy, but his right of action against the
debtor.
106. Alfenus Verrus, Epitomes of the Digest by Paulus, Book II.Where the
following was inserted in a will: "Let my heir be charged
with a hundred aurei,"but did not add "the payment of," it is settled
that the legacy will be due.
107. Africanus, Questions, Book II.
Where several heirs are charged with the payment of a bequest, which one of
them is directed to pay as a preferred legacy ? It is said that it is in the
power of those to whom the legacy was bequeathed to choose whether they will
bring suit against the heirs singly, or only against the one who was directed
to pay the preferred legacy; hence the latter must give security to his co-
heirs for the purpose of indemnifying them.
(1) Where anyone bequeaths a slave to whom he has left a legacy, without
granting him his freedom, "If he should be his slave when he dies," there is no
doubt whatever that the legacy will be valid at some future time, because, on
the death of the slave, the legacy which is left to him will belong to the
person to whom the slave himself was bequeathed.
108. The Same, Questions, Book V.
Where a slave, who is bequeathed, is said to have taken to flight during the
lifetime of the testator, the heir must restore him, but the expense, and the
risk attending the pursuit must be borne by the party to whom the slave was
bequeathed; as the heir is not compelled to deliver the property bequeathed
except in the place where it was left by the testator.
(1) If the property left me by will, which you are obliged to deliver, should
be given by anyone else to my slave, I will still be entitled to an action
based on the will; and, above all, if I should not be aware that the property
had become mine. Otherwise, the result would be that,
even if you should give the said property to my slave, you would release
yourself without my consent, which under no circumstances is to be admitted;
since you cannot release yourself from liability without my consent, even by
making payment in this manner.
(2) Where a slave was bequeathed to Titius, the question arose whether the
right to make the choice of the slave to be given would belong to the heir, or
to the legatee. I answered that it would be more equitable to hold that he
should be entitled to the choice who has the power to make use of whichever
action he chooses, that is to say the legatee.
(3) The gift of a legacy expressed in the following terms: "I bequeath to So-
and-So, or So-and-So, whichever of them first ascends to the Capitol,"
Africanus says will be valid; for the manifest reason that where an usufruct is
bequeathed to freedmen, and the ownership of the property to whichever of them
survives, the legacy will be valid. He thinks that the same opinion should be
given with reference to the appointment of an heir.
(4) Titius charged you with a bequest of Stichus to me, concerning whom I have
already entered into stipulation with you. If the stipulation was not founded
on a valuable consideration, it was held that the legacy would be valid. If,
however, the delivery of the slave was founded on two valuable considerations,
then it is preferable to hold that the legacy is void, for the reason that no
one loses anything, and the same property cannot be delivered twice.
(5) Where, however, you already owe me Stichus under the terms of the will of
Titius, and Sempronius has charged you, his heir, with the delivery of the same
slave to me as a legacy, and has requested me to deliver the said slave to a
third party, the legacy will be valid, because I am not to retain the slave.
The same rule will apply where he bequeathed me a sum of money; and it will be
still more applicable if a trust was established by a former will.
Likewise, if there was ground for the application of the Falcidian Law under
the terms of the first will, what has been deducted on account of it I can
acquire by virtue of the second.
(6) Again, if I should become the heir of the owner of a certain tract of land,
and he should not prove to be solvent, and you are directed to deliver said
land to me; your obligation will continue to exist, just as it would do if I
had purchased the land.
(7) Where it is provided by a will, "Let my heir pay to Seius ten aureimore
than I have bequeathed to Titius," there can be no doubt that Titius will be
entitled to his legacy, and that there will be no more than ten aureidue to
Seius. For it is customary to make a bequest in the following terms: "I
bequeath so much to Lucius Titius, and as much more to his wife and children."
(8) Where property is bequeathed to a person to whom nothing was previously
left, with the addition, "This much more," there is no doubt whatever that what
has been bequeathed in this manner is due. There should be even less doubt if I
should stipulate with a person
who owes me nothing as follows: "You promise to pay me ten aureimore than you
owe me," that ten will be due.
(9) Where a slave belonging to another is bequeathed to someone, and ordered to
be free, it is held that he can be claimed by the legatee, for his grant of
freedom is of no effect. It is absurd that the legacy should be rendered void,
which would be valid if only the slave had been bequeathed.
(10) Where an individual had five aureiin his chest, and bequeathed them, or
promised in a stipulation, "The ten aureiwhich I have in my chest," the legacy
or the stipulation will be valid; but only five aureiwill be due under either.
Moreover, it seems hardly reasonable that the five aureiwhich are lacking
should be claimed under the will; for in this instance certain property which
is not in existence is considered to have been bequeathed. If, however, at the
time of the testator's death, the entire amount should be in his chest, and it
should subsequently be somewhat diminished, the heir alone must undoubtedly
bear the loss.
(11) Where a slave is bequeathed, and the heir is in default, his life and any
diminution in value which he may sustain will be at the risk of the heir; so
that if he is disabled when delivered, the heir will, nevertheless, be liable.
(12) Where anything has been left to you, and you are charged, as trustee, to
deliver it to me, if you do not receive anything else under the will, it is
held that you will only be liable where you have been guilty of bad faith in
not claiming the legacy, otherwise, I will be to blame; just as is the case in
contracts of good faith, if the contract is for the benefit of both parties, he
who should deliver the property is responsible for negligence, but where it is
for the benefit of only one, the trustee is only responsible for fraud.
(13) A man gave certain jewels to Titius by way of pledge, and appointed his
son his heir, and then disinherited him; and finally provided in his will: "I
ask you, Titius, and I charge you to sell the jewels which I gave to you in
pledge, and after having deducted all that is due to you, to pay the balance to
my daughter." Under this provision, the daughter can claim the trust from her
brother, so as to compel him to assign to her his rights of action against the
debtor. In this instance, he is understood to be the debtor, who in the first
place was the creditor, that is to say, for the balance of the price of the
pledge remaining after payment of the debt.
(14) It should not be considered surprising if, in a case like that above
mentioned, one party should be charged with a trust, and another bound by it;
for when the following is inserted into a will, namely, "I ask you, Titius, to
receive a hundred aurei,and manumit such-and-such a slave, or to pay a certain
sum to Sempronius," this does not seem to have been properly expressed; still,
it should be understood to mean that the heir must discharge the trust, as well
as pay the money to Titius, and therefore that Titius himself will be entitled
to an action against the heir, and will be compelled to grant the slave
freedom, or pay the sum to Sempronius which he was asked to do.
slave, and the person to whom he was given should manumit him, the heir will be
responsible for his value, even though he was not aware that the slave had been
bequeathed to him.
(2) Where a legacy was bequeathed as follows, "I give and bequeath to Titius,
together with Seius," the legacy is left to both of the parties, just as there
are two legacies where a tract of land is devised with the Formian House.
(3) Where anyone by his will directs something to be done which is contrary to
law or good morals, the provision will not be valid; for example, if he should
direct something to be done which was in violation of a certain law, or against
the Praetorian Edict, or should order some dishonorable act to be performed.
(4) The Divine Severus and Antoninus stated in a Rescript that an oath inserted
in a will which was opposed to the general tenor of the laws, or the authority
of some special enactment, is of no force or effect.
113. The Same, Institutes, Book VII.
A bequest can be made to the slave of another as follows, "As long as he
remains a slave," or, "If he should become the slave of Titius," which was also
held by Marcellus.
(1) If anyone should grant freedom to his slave after the lapse of a certain
period, and, in the meantime, should charge his heir to furnish him with
subsistence until he obtained his freedom; the Divine Severus and Antoninus
stated in a Rescript that the wish of the testator must be complied with.
(2) If anyone should charge his heir with the payment of a legacy of a hundred
aureito someone, and charge a substitute with two hundred aureito be paid to
the same person, and afterwards should again mention the bequests in general
terms, he is held to have referred to the said three hundred aurei.
(3) If, however, a father should make a pupillary substitution for his son
under the age of puberty, and should refer to the legacy to be discharged by
the substitute, and the minor becomes his heir, and dies before reaching
puberty, the repetition of the legacy will not be valid, because it was the
intention of the deceased that it should be due but once.
(4) Where a child under the age of puberty is charged with a legacy under the
condition, "If he should arrive at puberty," and the legacy is repeated in a
substitution, it will also be due from the substitute; for the condition is not
considered to be repeated which would render the legacy void.
(5) Foolish wishes of deceased persons relative to their interment (for
instance, where they desire unnecesary expenses to be incurred for clothing, or
other things to be used at their funerals), are not valid; as Papinianus states
in the Third Book of Opinions.
114. The Same, Institutes, Book VIII.
A son under paternal control, who is a soldier or who has been discharged from
the service, even though he may die intestate, can charge his father with a
trust, for the reason that he can make a will.
(1) If a freedman should die intestate, he can charge his patron with a trust
to the extent of the share of his estate to which his patron is entitled;
because if he should execute a will, he can only leave his patron the amount
allowed by law.
(2) Where a man dies intestate, and knows that his property will revert to the
Treasury, he can charge the Treasury with a trust.
(3) The following case is discussed by Marcellus in the Twelfth Book of the
Digest. A certain individual charged a person with a trust to whom he had
bequeathed a tract of land, directing him to transfer the said land to
Sempronius after his death; and he also charged the same legatee to pay Titius
a hundred aurei.The question arises, what is the law in this instance?
Marcellus says that if the testator left Titius a hundred aureito be paid out
of the profits which the legatee if living could have collected, and the latter
died after a time sufficient for the sum of a hundred aureito be obtained from
the profits, Titius will be entitled to that amount. But if the legatee should
die immediately after having received the legacy, the trust created for the
benefit of Titius will be extinguished because it is settled that one cannot be
compelled to deliver more than was bequeathed to him.
(4) If, however, the trust for the benefit of Titius was to be discharged
before the death of the legatee, Marcellus says that the sum provided by the
trust must immediately be paid to Titius, but that he will be required to give
security to refund any surplus which there might be, and this security will be
operative if the legatee should die before a hundred aureiare obtained from the
profits. It can, however, hardly be maintained that the testator intended that
the bequest should be paid out of the profits before the legatee had been able
to collect them.
The legatee should certainly be heard if he desires to deliver the entire tract
of land, provided the beneficiary furnishes security for its return, for it
would be absurd to compel the legatee to pay a hundred aurei,especially if the
land is only worth that much, or very little more. This is the practice at the
present time.
(5) Where anything is bequeathed to someone in accordance with law, or some
interest or right is left which cannot be enjoyed or held on account of some
defect or qualification attaching to the thing bequeathed, or for any other
good reason, and another party can hold said property, the legatee will be
entitled to receive from the heir the appraised value of what it would
ordinarily sell for.
(6) A person cannot be charged by will to appoint someone else as his heir. The
Senate plainly decided that such a provision was to be considered just as if a
testator had charged his heir to surrender the estate.
(7) But what if an heir should be charged to deliver a fourth part of the
estate, after the death of the testator? I think the better opinion is the one
which Scaevola mentions in his notes, and which was adopted by Papirius Fronto,
namely, that such a trust is valid, and has the same effect as if he had been
charged to deliver the entire inheritance; and it should be delivered to the
extent that the estate of the testator will permit, in accordance with the
ordinary rule of law.
(8) Where an heir is charged with the emancipation of his children, he is not
compelled to do this, for the paternal authority is not to be estimated in
money.
(9) Houses which are to be demolished cannot be devised directly, or left under
the terms of a trust, and this was decreed by the Senate.
(10) Where a trust is left to a slave belonging to another, without the grant
of his freedom, and he becomes free, it must be said that he can be permitted
to receive the trust.
(11) The Divine Severus and Antoninus stated in a Rescript that where a brother
was charged to deliver the estate to the nephews of the deceased conditionally
he cannot, before the time for the discharge of the trust has arrived, deliver
it to them, even with their own consent, while they are still under the control
of their father, as he can do when the time fixed for the discharge of the
trust has expired, and the heirs have become their own masters; or where, if
one of the children should die before this, delivery cannot be made to all of
them.
(12) The same Emperors stated in a Rescript that it is not necessary for the
estate of a mother to be delivered to her children before the time prescribed
for the discharge of the trust arrives. But the heir can furnish them with the
ordinary bond, or if he cannot do so, the children can be placed in possession
of the estate for the purpose of preserving the trust, so that they hold
possession of it by way of pledge, and not as owners, without the right to
dispose of it, but retaining it merely in the capacity of pledgees, just as a
father acquires the profits of property through his son, and a master through
his slave.
(13) Where an heir is charged to deliver an estate under the terms of a trust,
and dies without issue, the condition is considered to have failed to take
place, if his children survive him, and no inquiry is made as to whether they
claimed their rights as heirs.
(14) The Divine Severus and Antoninus stated in a Rescript that where a
testator forbids by will any of his estate to be sold, but gives no reason for
making this provision, and no one is found with reference to whom this
disposition was inserted in the will, the provision is held to be of no force
or effect; just as if the testator had left a mere direction, because such a
precept cannot be inserted in a will.
But where testators make a similar provision with a view to the benefit of
their children, their descendants, their freedmen, their heirs, or any other
persons whomsoever, it must be carried out; still this cannot be done in such a
way as to defraud creditors or the Public Treasury. For if the property of the
heir should be sold in order to pay the creditors of the testator, the trust
beneficiaries must also be subject to the same rule.
(15) Where a father, after having appointed his son by whom he had three
grandsons his heir, charged him by a trust not to sell a certain tract of land,
in order that it might remain in the family; and the son, having died,
appointed two of his children heirs and disinherited a third, and bequeathed
the said tract of land to a stranger, the Divine Severus and Antoninus stated
in a Rescript that it was evident that the said son had not complied with the
wishes of the deceased.
(16) But if, as Marcellus holds, he had disinherited two of his children, and
appointed only one of them his heir, and had devised the said land to a
stranger, the disinherited child could claim the trust. This would also happen
if, while living, he had emancipated his children, and afterwards sold the
land.
(17) Where all the children are appointed heirs to unequal shares of an estate,
those who are appointed for the smaller shares cannot claim the benefit of the
trust, so as to receive equal portions of the estate, and not the shares to
which they are entitled; for although the testator left the land to but one of
his children, it is a fact that he left it to be kept in the family.
(18) In like manner, if he only appointed one heir, and did not bequeath any
legacy, the children who were disinherited cannot claim anything, solong as the
property remains in the family.
(19) Sometimes, a slave is bequeathed and dies without any loss to the heir, or
he is left in trust, as, for instance, if the slave of another, or even the
slave of the testator should be bequeathed to several legatees as well as
separately, so that each one will have an interest in the entire legacy; but
this only occurs when the slave dies without the heir being to blame.
115. Ulpianus, Institutes, Book II.
Moreover, where a bequest is made as follows: "I wish you to give; I require
you to give; I think that you should give," a trust is created.
116. Florentinus, Institutes, Book XI.
A legacy is a deduction from an estate whereby a testator desires that
something should be given to a person which otherwise would have entirely
belonged to the heir.
(1) An heir cannot be charged with a legacy for his own benefit, but you, as
his co-heir, can be charged with one for his benefit. Therefore, if a tract of
land is devised to a person who is appointed heir to half of the estate, and
there are also two heirs who are strangers, the sixth part of the said tract of
land will belong to the heir to whom the land was left, because he cannot claim
half of it from himself; and with respect to the other half held by his co-heir
he cannot claim more than the third part conjointly with the two strangers. The
strangers, however, will have a right to claim half of the land from the heir
to whom it has been devised, and each of them a third from the other heir.
(2) Where a slave belonging to another is appointed an heir, he cannot be
charged with a legacy of himself, either entirely or partially.
(3) A legacy can lawfully be bequeathed to a slave who forms part of an estate,
even though it has not been entered upon, because the estate represents the
person of the deceased who left it.
(4) Where real property is devised, it should be delivered in the same
condition in which it was left. Therefore, whether it owes a servitude to land
belonging to the heir, or the latter owes it a servitude, and even though these
servitudes may have been extinguished through confusion of ownership, the
former right must be restored, and if the legatee does not permit the servitude
to be imposed, and claims the legacy, he can be opposed by an exception on the
ground of bad faith. Where, however, the servitude is not restored to the land
entitled to it, an action under the will will remain in favor of the legatee.
117. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIII.
Where any property is left to a city the bequest will all be valid, whether it
is left for distribution, or to be expended in labor, in provisions, in the
instruction of children, or for any other purpose.
118. Neratius, Rules, Book X.
Where a trust is expressed in the following terms: "I require; I desire; that
you give," it is valid, or where it is expressed as follows, "I wish my estate
to belong to Titius; I know that you will deliver my estate to Titius."
119. Marcianus, Rules, Book I.
Where a slave is forbidden by the testator to render an account, it does not
follow that, by not being obliged to do so, he can obtain for his own benefit
what may be in his hands; but, in order to avoid a too rigid examination being
made, that is to say, that the slave may not be held accountable for
negligence, but only for fraud. Therefore, his peculiumis not considered to
have been bequeathed to a manumitted slave merely for the reason that he is
prohibited from rendering an account.
120. Ulpianus, Opinions, Book II.
Nothing is stated by which an heir is prevented from selling houses belonging
to an estate, although annuities may have been left to be derived from their
rent, provided the right to the legacy remains Unimpaired.
(1) Where all the parties to whom a trust has been bequeathed consent to the
sale of the property, no further demand can be made under the terms of the
trust.
(2) Where a tract of land has been unconditionally devised, and its profits
have been acquired by the legatee after acceptance of the estate, they will
belong to him, and the tenant interested in said profits will be entitled to an
action against the heir under his lease.

121. Marcianus, Rules, Book I.
If anyone should bequeath a legacy to Titius and Maevius, one of them will be
permitted to accept the legacy without the other. For
when the Praetor says, "Iorder that the unborn child, together with the other
children, shall be placed in possession of the estate," even though there are
no other children, the unborn child will be placed in possession.

122. Paulus, Rules, Book III.
A bequest can be made to a town for the purpose of honoring or ornamenting it.
In order to ornament it, for instance, where a legacy has been left for the
purpose of building a forum, a theatre, or a racecourse ; to honor it, for
example, where the bequest was made to provide for the compensation of
gladiators, comic actors, and participants in the games of the circus, or where
it was made to be divided among the citizens, or to meet the expense of
banquets. And further, whatever is left for the support of persons who are
infirm through age, such as old men, or boys and girls, it is held to have been
done for the honor of the town.

(1) "Let Lucius Titius and Gaius Seius be charged with the payment of ten
aureito Publius Maevius." Gaius Seius did not present himself as heir. Sabinus
says that Titius alone will owe the entire legacy, for Seius is considered not
to have been included in the bequest. This opinion is correct, that is to say,
Titius will be liable for the entire ten aurei.

(2) Where a tract of land has been devised to someone under the following
condition, "If he should pay a hundred aureito my heir," and if the land should
only be worth as much as the legatee is ordered to pay to the heir, he cannot
be compelled to execute the trust with which he was charged, since he is not
considered to have acquired anything by the will where he must pay out as much
as he received.

123. Marcellus, Opinions.
Lucius Titius, who left his two children his heirs, inserted the following
provision into his will: "Whichever my children shall be my heir, I charge him,
if he should die without issue, to transfer to his brother two-thirds of my
estate when he dies." The brother, at the time of his death, appointed his
brother heir to three-quarters; and I ask whether he complied with the terms of
the trust. Marcellus answered that what the testator owed his brother under the
will of Lucius Titius can be demanded by him in proportion to his interest in
the estate; unless it can be proved that the intention of the testator was
otherwise; for there is little difference between this case and one where a
creditor becomes the heir of his debtor.
It is clear, however, that the co-heir should be heard, if he can prove that
the testator, when he appointed his brother heir, intended that he should be
content with the appointment, and relinquish the benefit to be derived from the
trust.

(1) The following provision was inserted into a will: "Let my heir deliver
such-and-such property to Gaius Seius, and I charge Seius, and I trust to his
good faith for the delivery of all the property abovementioned, without delay."
I ask whether this creates an implied trust, as the testator did not indicate
in his will the person to whom he wished the property to be delivered.
Marcellus answered that if Seius had tacitly given his promise for the purpose
of defrauding the law, he could in no way derive any benefit from the words
written by the testator. For the law must not be thought to have been any the
less evaded, because it is uncertain whose advantage the testator had in view.

124. Neratius, Parchments, Book V.
If heirs who are expressly mentioned are charged with the delivery of property,
it is more reasonable to suppose that they are charged with equal portions,
because the enumeration of the persons has the effect to make them all equally
liable for the payment of the legacy, for, if they had not been expressly
mentioned, they would be liable only for their respective shares in the estate.

125. Rutilius Maximus, On the Lex Falcidia.
Where an heir is ordered to deliver an estate, and reserve a hundred aureifor
himself, and his patron demands possession of the estate contrary to the
provisions of the will, the legacies, as well as the amount reserved, will be
diminished in proportion to what was obtained by the patron.

126. Paulus, On Pupillary Substitutions.
The substitute of a disinherited son cannot legally be charged with a legacy.
Therefore, the heir-at-law of a disinherited son cannot be charged with a
trust, because heirs-at-law are only compelled to discharge the duties of a
trust where they have also been appointed heirs.
If, however, one of the children should take advantage of the Edict of the
Praetor, by which possession is promised in opposition to the provisions of the
will, and the appointed heir should also demand possession contrary to its
provisions, the substitute of the first of the children must pay the legacies,
just as if a patrimonial estate had come Into the hands of the son for whom he
was substituted, and as if the son had received from his father that to which
he was entitled and had acquired through possession of the estate under the
Praetorian Law.

(1) Where a posthumous child is charged with a legacy as follows, "If he
becomes my heir," and no posthumous child should be born, the substitutes can
enter upon the estate; and it must be held that they owe the legacies for which
the posthumous child would have been responsible, if it had been born.

127. The Same, On the Law of Codicils.
The posthumous child of a brother can be charged with a trust. For, with
reference to trusts, the intention of the deceased is also considered ; and the
opinion of Callus, who holds that the posthumous children of others can become
our heirs at law, prevails.

128. Marcianus, Institutes, Book II.
If a guardian marries his female ward in violation of the Decree of the Senate,
she can take under his will, but he cannot take anything
under hers; and this is reasonable, for parties who contract forbidden
marriages are guilty of an offence, and deserve to be punished. The woman,
however, should not be considered to be to blame who has been deceived by her
guardian.
