BOOK XVI.

** TITLE I. ON THE VELLEIAN DECREE OF THE SENATE
** TITLE II. CONCERNING SET-OFF
** TITLE III. CONCERNING THE DIRECT AND CONTRARY ACTIONS ON DEPOSIT


THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS. BOOK XVI.

* TITLE I. ON THE VELLEIAN DECREE OF THE SENATE.

1. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

The Velleian Decree of the Senate very fully provides that women cannot
become sureties for anyone.

(1) For as, by our customs, women are deprived of civil office and very
many things which they do are void by mere operation of law, much more
should they be deprived of the power to perform an act in which not only
their services and the mere employment of the same are involved, but
also the risk of their entire private property.

(2) It seems to be just to come to the relief of a woman in this
manner, so that an action should be granted against an old debtor, or
against a party who had rendered a woman liable in his behalf, for the
reason that he, rather than the creditor, had taken advantage of her.

2. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

In the first place, during the reign of the Divine Augustus, and
subsequently during that of Claudius, it was forbidden by Imperial
Edicts that women should become sureties for their husbands.

(1) Afterwards, a Decree of the Senate was enacted by which relief was
granted in the most perfect manner to all women. The terms of this
Decree of the Senate are as follows: "Whereas, Marcus Silanus and
Velleius Tutor, Consuls, have made statements concerning the obligations
of women who have become responsible for the debts of other persons, and
have given advice on this subject, as to what was necessary to be done;
and, whereas this matter relates to securities and the making of loans
in behalf of others for whom women had become bound, and although it
appears to have been formerly decided by law that no demand, on this
account, could be made upon them, nor any action be brought against them
when they performed the duties of men, and as it is not just for them to
be liable to obligations of this description; therefore, the Senate has
decreed that those to whom application is made in court must act
properly and in conformity with the established mode of procedure, and
exert themselves so that the will of the Senate with respect to this
matter may be observed."

(2) Therefore, let us examine the terms of this Decree of the Senate,
after having previously eulogized the forethought of this most
distinguished body of men which has brought relief to women on account
of the weakness of their sex, in many supposed, as well as actual
instances.

(3) Relief is only granted to them, however, where they have not been
guilty of deceit, and this the Divine Pius and Severus stated in a
Rescript, for assistance is rendered to those who have been deceived,
but not to such as are guilty of fraud; and this is set forth in the
Rescript of Severus, written in the Greek language, which says that this
Decree of the Senate is not for the purpose of aiding women who are
guilty of deception, for it is the infirmity of women, and not their
cunning, that deserves assistance.

(4) Every kind of obligation is included in the Velleian Decree of the
Senate, whether women have rendered themselves liable verbally, by the
delivery of property, or by any other contract whatsoever.

(5) Where a woman even appears voluntarily in defence of anyone, there
is no doubt that she binds herself in his favor, for she assumes the
obligation of another, since she exposes herself to have judgment
rendered against him in a matter of this kind. Hence a woman is not
permitted to undertake the defence of her husband, her child, or her
father.

3. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

Where, however, a woman appears for the defence of a party who, if he
has judgment rendered against him, will have recourse against her, (as,
for instance, where she appears in defence of the vendor of an estate
which she has sold to him or to a surety of hers) she is not held to
have bound herself in his behalf.

4. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

If, however, I make a contract in the beginning, when I am ignorant for
whom she wishes this to be done, the Decree of the Senate undoubtedly
will not apply; and this the Divine Pius and our present Emperor stated
in a Rescript.

(1) Hence, if when she wished to make a gift to Titius, she borrowed a
sum of money from me, and gave it to Titius, the Decree of the Senate
will not apply; but if she was about to give it to you, and pays the
money to your creditor, she does not bind herself, for the Senate
intended to give relief to a woman who had obligated herself, and not to
one who had made a donation; and this was done for the reason that a
woman incurs an obligation with more facility than she makes donations.

5. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book IX.*

It makes no difference whether the woman has paid the money for the
purpose of discharging the debt, or has given in payment any of her
property whatsoever, for even if she had sold her property and either
paid the price received for the same in behalf of another, or
substituted the purchaser to another creditor, I do not think that the
Decree of the Senate will be operative, so far as the creditor of
another party is concerned.

6. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

Where persons bind themselves as sureties in behalf of the defender of a
son who is absent, by the direction of his mother; the question arises
whether relief will be granted them also by this Decree of the Senate?
Papinianus says, in the Ninth Book of Questions, that they can make use
of an exception, nor does it make much difference that they have given
security for the defender, since they did so having in mind the
direction of the mother. He says that it is evident that, if the party
who accepted the said sureties was ignorant that the mother directed
them to assume the obligation, the exception based on the Decree of the
Senate can be met with a reply on the ground of fraud.

7. *Papinianus, Questions, Book IX.*

Therefore, although the surety, having filed a replication on the ground
of fraud, loses the defence based on the exception, he will,
nevertheless, not be entitled to a replication as against the woman,
because he cannot allege ignorance of the facts. It would not be unjust,
however, for an action on the ground of business transacted to be
granted against a defender; because it is established by the Decree of
the Senate that a proceeding on the ground of mandate is void, and he is
released by payment of the money by the surety.

8. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

Although the giving of a pledge establishes an obligation, still,
Julianus states in the Twelfth Book of the Digest that the restoration
of a pledge does not constitute the giving of security, if a woman, who
is the creditor, releases to the debtor the property which she received
in pledge.

(1) Where a woman appears before the guardians of her son to prevent
them from selling his land, and promises to indemnify them; Papinianus,
in the Ninth Book of Questions, does not think that she bound herself as
surety, for she did not accept either the old or new obligation with
reference to another, but she herself contracted this obligation.

(2) Where a woman binds herself to Primus in behalf of Secundus, and
afterwards binds herself in behalf of Primus to his creditor; Julianus
states in the Twelfth Book of the Digest that she has bound herself
twice, once for Primus to Secundus, and again for Primus to his
creditor, and therefore she has contracted an obligation both for
Primus, and against him.

Marcellus, however, notes that a difference exists here, that is,
whether it must be understood that the woman, in the beginning, has been
substituted in the place of another, and has undertaken to assume the
burden of the debtor from whom the creditor desired the obligation to be
transferred; or whether she was substituted as a debtor, so that, if
this was the case, there is but one giving of security. Hence, in
accordance with this distinction, which existed at first sight where she
has, so to speak, been substituted as a debtor, Marcellus will not

grant her an exception based on the Decree of the Senate. However, after
having judgment rendered against her, or even before this takes place,
she will certainly be entitled to a personal action against the party by
whom she has been substituted.

(3) Sometimes a suit for recovery will lie in favor of a woman who
gives security, to recover what she has paid, or if she has not yet paid
anything, to obtain her release from liability, for example, where,
having bound herself in violation of the Decree of the Senate, she
substitutes her debtor; as, in this instance, a personal action for
recovery will lie in her favor against her creditor, just as if she
brought suit for money which she had paid, for anyone who substitutes a
debtor

makes payment.

(4) But if he who has been substituted by the woman is not indebted to
her, he can avail himself of the exception based on the Decree of the
Senate, as he could have done if he had been her surety.

(5) It is evident that if a woman, being about to bind herself,
substitutes her debtor, the Decree of the Senate will not apply,
because, even though she paid the money, it will not be applicable; for
the woman is granted relief by the Decree of the Senate, but does not
make restitution of property which has been lost.

(6) If, however, she has substituted some one who was not her debtor, a
fraud is held to have been committed against the Decree of the Senate,
and therefore an exception will be granted.

(7) Where a woman becomes bound for a debtor, the former action is
granted against him, even though he may have been discharged from
liability by a release before the woman obligated herself.

(8) Where a creditor has agreed with his debtor that the latter shall
provide some one in his place, and this proposition having been
accepted, he is thereupon released, and he then gives a woman as surety
who can have recourse for aid to the Decree of the Senate, a personal
action can be brought against him, just as if he had not given any
surety; for what difference is there between not giving any, and giving
one of this kind? Therefore, a prætorian action will not be necessary,
since a personal action for recovery will lie.

(9) Marcellus also states that, if a creditor releases a woman after
she has become a surety, an action for restitution should, nevertheless,
be granted to the creditor, for he has released an obligation which

is void.

(10) If a woman, after having become a surety, makes payment in such a
way that she cannot recover, the former debtor can very properly refuse
to defend an action brought against him; but, as the principal debtor is
released, and the woman makes payment in such a way that she cannot
recover, he cannot recover from her either, if he should pay, and the
creditor should release him in the same manner.

(11) Although the action is restored against all those who are
released, this is, however, not done in favor of all creditors; as, for
instance, where there are two creditors who enter into a stipulation,
and a woman becomes surety to one of them, the obligation is restored in
the case of him alone to whom she became surety.

(12) Where a creditor becomes the heir of a woman who has assumed an
obligation of this kind, it should be considered whether the action for
restitution will not be available. Julianus says in the Twelfth Book
that he is, nevertheless, entitled to the action for restitution, and
this is not unreasonable, as he in fact succeeded to a woman not legally
bound, and therefore this debt will not be taken into account in the
administration of the *Lex Falcidia.*

(13) It is evident that, if you propose to me the case of a woman who
has succeeded as heir to an original debtor, it must be said that she
can be sued in an action for restitution as well as in a direct action,
for it makes no difference whatever under which action proceedings are
brought.

(14) If, when I am about to make a contract with you, a woman appears,
and I prefer to make a contract with her, she is held to have

bound herself as surety, and, in this instance, an action will be
granted against you, the effect of which is rather to originate than to
restore an obligation; so that, in consequence, you will be bound by the
same kind of an obligation as that by which the woman is bound; for
example, if the woman is bound by a stipulation, you also can be sued as
under a stipulation.

(15) It should be considered whether, if a woman offered herself as a
surety for a party who was not bound when a contract was made with him,
he should be liable to this action; as, for instance, where a woman
became surety for a ward without the sanction of his guardian. I think
that the ward would not be bound unless he profited pecuniarily by the
contract. Moreover, he for whom the woman became a surety, if he is
under twenty-five years of age, can demand complete restitution, or if,
while a son under paternal control, he entered into a contract in
violation of the Decree of the Senate, he will be entitled to the same
privilege.

9. *Paulus, Rules, Book VI.*

Where a woman becomes surety for the slave of another, the action will
be restored against the master, just as it would have been against the
head of the family as the principal debtor.

10. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXIX.*

These actions which are granted against those in whose behalf a woman
has become surety, and against their heirs, are perpetual; for they have
in view the recovery of the property, and they will be granted also in
favor of prætorian successors as well as against them.

11. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

Where a woman borrows money under the pretext of using it for her own
purposes, but in fact with the intention of lending it to another; there
is no ground for the application of the Decree of the Senate, otherwise,
no one would contract with women, because he would be ignorant what
their intentions were.

12. *The Same, Abridgments, Book VI.*

The Decree of the Senate will, however, certainly be operative when the
creditor is aware that the woman has become a surety.

13. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book IX.*

Sometimes, although a woman may have assumed an obligation in behalf of
another, she is not assisted by this Decree of the Senate, which happens
when a woman assumes an obligation which, at first sight, appears indeed
to be that of another, but is, in reality her own; as for instance,
where a female slave has provided another debtor on account of an
agreement connected with her freedom, and, after her manumission,
assumes the very obligation which the debtor owes; or where a woman
purchases an estate, and assumes the debts of the estate herself, or
where she becomes the guarantor of her own surety.

(1) A creditor has no need of a new action with reference to the
pledges of a former debtor, as the Servian Action (which is also
designated the hypothecary action) is available in instances of this
kind; since it is true that an agreement has been made with reference to
pledges, and that the money has not been paid.

(2) If a woman appears as surety for another party under a certain
condition, or with reference to a certain time; while the condition is
pending, an action for restitution should be granted to the creditor
against the former debtor, if he wishes it; for what advantage will it
be to wait for the fulfillment of the condition, or for the expiration
of the time, since the former debtor is in such a position that he must,
by all means, defend the action brought against him?

14. *Julianus, Digest, Book XII.*

Where a woman has become surety for another in violation of the Decree
of the Senate, it is but just that the action should be restored for the
benefit of the creditor not only against the original debtor, but also
against his sureties; for when the responsibility of the woman was taken
away from the creditor on account of the Decree of the Senate, the
former cause of action should be restored unimpaired.

15. *The Same, Digest, Book XV.*

Where I pay a woman what I owe you, and I stipulate with her that you
will ratify her act, and you do not do so; I can institute proceedings
based on the stipulation, and the exception founded on the Decree of the
Senate which was enacted with reference to the obligations of women,
will not be of any advantage to her; for she cannot be considered as
refusing to assume the obligation of another, when I remain bound for
the debt, and she herself profits by the transaction; and she may rather
be held to have returned what was not due, than to have paid it out in
behalf of another.

16. *The Same, On Urseius Ferox, Book IV.*

If a woman has become surety for me to Titius, in violation of the
Velleian Decree of the Senate, and Titius sues her for the money

which I have paid her, she cannot avail herself of the exception based
on the Decree of the Senate, for she was in no danger of losing the
money, since she already has it in her possession.

(1) If I have accepted a surety for a woman who has bound herself in
violation of the Decree of the Senate, Gaius Cassius answered that an
exception should be granted to the said surety, only to the extent that
the woman had asked him to be responsible for her.

Julianus, however, thinks very properly than an exception should be
granted to the surety, even though he is not entitled to an action on
mandate against the woman; for the reason that the Senate disapproves of
the entire obligation, and the liability of the former debtor to the
creditor is reestablished by the Prætor.

17. *Africanus, Questions, Book IV.*

A husband, desiring to make a present to his wife, sold her property at
a very low price, and substituted her for that price to one of his
creditors. The answer was that the sale was of no force or effect, and
if the creditor sued the woman for the money, an exception would be
available, even if the creditor has thought that the woman was the
debtor of her husband. This does not seem to be contrary to the
established principle, in accordance with which if a woman has borrowed
money for the purpose of lending it to her husband, an exception cannot
be interposed if the creditor was ignorant with what intention she
borrowed it; since, indeed, it makes a great deal of difference whether
anyone contracts with a woman in the first place, or transfers the
obligation of another to her, for then the creditor should be more
diligent.

(1) If a woman should say that she had received certain property in
pledge to secure her dowry as well as the payment of a sum of money, and
a creditor who was about to take the same property in pledge, should see
that the dowry was paid, and, being in possession, opposes her when she
brings the Servian Action on the ground that the pledge had not been
given with her consent; a replication, based on the Decree of the
Senate, will be of no advantage to the woman, unless the creditor was
aware that other money, exclusive of that of the dowry, was also due to
her.

(2) A woman and Titius borrowed money for the purpose of *expending *it
upon property belonging to them in common, and they became joint-debtors
for the said money. I said that the woman could not, by any means, be
held to have given security for the share of her partner; for if they
had borrowed money for a purpose for which the creditor did not lend it,
the woman would sustain the greater loss, (as, for instance, where a
house jointly owned by them was not propped up, or where a tract of land
held in common was confiscated) and it should rather be considered that
there was no ground for the application of the Decree of the Senate. But
where the borrowed money was obtained for some purchase, then she would
be held to have become surety for her share, and therefore the creditor
could only collect part of the money from her; because, if he claimed
the entire amount, he

would be barred by an exception with reference to a portion of the same.

18. *Paulus, On Plautius, Book VIII.*

The same rule applies where Titius and the woman become sureties, as two
debtors, for my debtor.

19. *Africanus, Questions, Book IV.*

The guardian of a ward died after having appointed Titius his heir. The
latter hesitated to accept the estate, because the guardianship was
supposed to have been badly administered, and the mother of the ward
having persuaded Titius to enter upon the estate at her risk, he did so,
and made an agreement with her that she would indemnify him against any
loss he might sustain. If Titius should be compelled to pay anything to
the ward on account of the estate, and should sue the mother, it was
denied that an exception based on the Decree of the Senate would be
available, for it is scarcely to be supposed that any woman would become
surety for a party in his presence.

(1) A proposition not unlike the one above mentioned was proposed,
namely: A certain man of Prætorian rank died leaving two sons, one of
whom had not arrived at puberty, and the other who was the legal
guardian of the first. The former wished to reject his father's estate,
but was prevailed upon to accept it by the wife of the deceased, who was
the mother of the ward, the latter having refused it.

Julianus says that he would have given a similar opinion if the guardian
had had judgment rendered against him in a case brought by the ward on
this account; and that he would not have been prevented by the Decree of
the Senate from recovering damages from the woman.

(2) In this connection, the following point should be discussed, that
is, if he who had entered upon the estate by the direction of the woman,
suffers any loss because the debtors of the estate are insolvent, would
the Decree of the Senate be applicable, since the woman had, to a
certain extent, assumed their obligations?

The better opinion is, however, that the Decree of the Senate would not
be available on this ground, since she did not intend to become surety
for them, but her intention was to guarantee the guardian against the
ward, and perhaps the estate against other creditors.

(3) Finally, if we suppose that the woman suffered some loss on account
of the purchase of the estate, because the debtors of the same were not
solvent; I do not think that there can be any doubt that the Decree of
the Senate will not apply, even though she was obliged to pay a certain
amount to the creditors.

(4) But what if Titius should hesitate to enter upon the estate,
because the obligations of the debtors seem to be of doubtful value; and
the woman promised that she, herself, would make good whatever he failed
to collect from any of said debtors? It is probable that, in this
instance, she has become liable.

(5) You have Titius for your debtor, and the woman desires to become
surety for him, and you did not accept her on account of the

Decree of the Senate; whereupon she applied to me for the purpose of
borrowing money with which to pay you, and I, being ignorant of the
reason for her making the loan, she made a promise to me to pay it, and
directed me to pay you the money. Then, for the reason that I did not
have the sum on hand, I bound myself to pay it to you.

The question arose whether I could collect that money from the woman, or
whether an exception based on the Decree of the Senate could be
effectually pleaded by her?

The answer was, that it should be considered whether it might not
reasonably be said that I could be held liable in the place of the party
who had become surety for the woman, and that, just as an exception is
granted against a creditor, although he may be ignorant that a woman has
become security for him, lest an action on mandate may be available
against the woman, so a valid exception can be granted against you, and
an action against the woman will be refused me, since this obligation
would be at her risk. This can the more readily be stated if, before I
had paid you the money, I should discover that the woman had become the
surety; but if I should have previously paid you, it should be
considered whether or not, an exception would, nevertheless, be granted
the woman against me, and I can bring a personal action against you to
recover the money; or whether, in fact, it should be held that in the
beginning I had lent the money to the woman, and afterwards you had made
a loan to me. This indeed was held to be the better opinion, so that
there was no ground for the Decree of the Senate, just as where a woman
substitutes her debtor there is no ground for considering this as
security. The authority states that these two examples cannot properly
be compared with one another, since, when the substitution of the debt
is made, the woman is not bound; but in the case stated she transfers
the obligation of another to herself, which it is certain the Senate did
not wish to be done.

20. *The Same, Questions, Book VIII.*

If a woman becomes surety for one debtor, where there are two, the
action is restored to the creditor as against both.

21. *Callistratus, Institutes, Book III.*

Where a woman becomes surety for another party, and what has been paid
is employed for her benefit, the exception based on the Decree of the
Senate will not apply, because she has suffered no loss.

(1) Likewise, a woman will not be protected by the Decree of the
Senate, if she has committed a generous act; as, for instance, where she
binds herself for her father to prevent his being annoyed by the payment
of a judgment which has been rendered against him, for the Senate gives
relief to the burdens of such persons.

22. *Paulus, Rules, Book VI.*

If I give money to a woman in order that she may pay my creditor, or she
promises to pay the debt; Pomponius states that where she makes such a
promise the Decree of the Senate will not be available,

because she has rendered herself liable to an action on mandate, and is
held to have bound herself with reference to her own affairs.

23. *The Same, On the Velleian Decree of the Senate.*

Where a woman interrogated in court answered that she was the heir, and
she did so well knowing that she was not the heir; she will, by no
means, be held to have bound herself to another, because she was guilty
of deception; but if she thought that she was the heir, and, being
deceived as to this, answered in this way; many authorities are of the
opinion that an action will be granted against her, but that she can
have recourse to an exception based on the Decree of the Senate.

24. *The Same, Concerning the Obligations Contracted by Women for
Others.*

Where a woman who was substituted as a debtor by a creditor, made a
promise in behalf of the party for whom she was substituted, she cannot
avail herself of an exception,

(1) But if she promised to pay money in order to avoid being
substituted, she is held to have obligated herself, and can do so.

(2) In a case where the benefit of the Decree of the Senate is
available, the question arises whether an action will lie against the
former debtor at the time when the woman obligated herself, or whether
the latter can bring suit for the recovery of what was paid? I think
that this can be done at once, and that it is not necessary to wait for
payment.

(3) Where a woman binds herself for a party who was liable to an action
limited by time, this temporary action will be restored to the creditor,
so that the time will run after the date of the restitution of the
action growing out of the preceding circumstances, although he could
have availed himself of it at the very instant that the woman became
surety.

25. *Modestinus, On Undertakings.*

Where a woman orders credit to be given to her slave, she will be liable
to a prætorian action.

(1) If she has given security for him, and suit has been brought
against her, she can protect herself by means of the exception under the
Velleian Decree of the Senate, unless she did this on account of some
affair of her own.

26. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXVII.*

Where a woman, with the intention of obligating herself for another,
states in court that the slave of someone else belongs to her, she can
avail herself of the aid of the Decree of the Senate on the ground of
having bound herself for another. It is evident that if she made this
answer with reference to one who was serving her as a slave in good
faith, she will not be considered to have bound herself for another.

27. *Papinianus, Opinions, Book III.*

Where a party having made a contract with a woman in good faith proceeds
against her because the money which he borrowed has been

employed in transactions between husband and wife; he will not be barred
by an exception based on the Decree of the Senate.

(1) Where slaves who have been appointed for the transaction of
business, in contracting with another, bring suit against a woman whose
obligation they think to be valid, an exception based on the Decree of
the Senate will bar their owner; nor will the position of the latter be
held to be prejudiced by the act of the slave, for nothing has been
obtained by the owner, any more than when a slave buys land which is in
litigation, or a man who is free.

(2) A wife substituted another woman as her debtor to her husband, and
the husband paid the money to her creditor. If she guaranteed the
solvency of the woman who was substituted to her husband, the exception
based on the Decree of the Senate will not be available, because the
woman is transacting her own business.

28. *Scævola, Opinions, Book I.*

Seia bought some slaves, and having borrowed money with her husband as
surety, paid the vendor. Her husband afterwards died insolvent, and, for
the purpose of defrauding his creditor, stated in his will that he owed
the entire amount; and the question arose whether the woman could be
held to have bound herself in behalf of another? I answered, that in
accordance with the facts stated, she had not bound herself.

A husband, in order to secure a lease, pledged to Sempronius a tract of
land belonging to his wife. The woman having afterwards borrowed money
from Numerius on her own account, with the encumbrance of the same tract
of land, immediately paid Sempronius for her husband. The question arose
whether she contracted this obligation in violation to the Decree of the
Senate. I answered that, if Numerius was aware that she had obligated
herself for another, the Decree of the Senate would apply in the case
stated.

29. *Paulus, Opinions, Book XVI.*

*A* certain man wished to contract with the heirs of Lucius Titius and
to lend them money, but as he suspected that they were not solvent, he
preferred to lend it to the widow of the testator, and take a pledge for
her. The woman lent the same money to the heirs, and took a pledge from
them. I ask whether she is held to have obligated herself for another,
and whether the pledges which she took are liable to the creditor?
Paulus answers that if the creditor who desired to make a contract with
the heirs of Lucius Titius avoided doing so with them, and preferred to
have the widow as his debtor, the Decree of the Senate which was enacted
with reference to the obligations contracted by women for others, will
be available against him, and that the pledges given by her will not be
liable. The property which the woman received by way of pledge from
those in whose behalf she became bound will be liable to the creditor of
the woman, and the prætor will not act unreasonably if he grants an
action against the principal creditors, for the purpose of relieving the
woman from responsibility, as well as against the property which had
been encumbered by them to her.

(1) Paulus states that everything which can be proved to have been
planned to evade the provisions of the Decree of the Senate enacted with
reference to the obligations incurred by women for others, should not be
considered valid.

30. *The Same, Sentences, Book II.*

Where a woman becomes surety for another with the intention to deceive,
or when she knew that she could not be held liable, an exception based
on the Decree of the Senate will not be granted her; for the most Noble
Order of the Senate does not exclude the action which will lie on
account of fraud committed by a woman.

(1) If an agent obligates himself for another by the direction of a
woman, he can have recourse to the exception based on the Velleian
Decree of the Senate, lest, otherwise, the right of action may be
extinguished.

31. *The Same, On Neratius, Book I.*

Paulus says if a woman does not wish to recover what she paid on account
of her becoming bound to another, but prefers to bring an action on
mandate, and to reimburse herself for indemnifying the debtor, she
should be heard.

32. *Pomponius, Decrees of the Senate, Book I.*

Where a woman enters upon the estate of anyone in order to assume
payment of the debts due from it, it will be difficult for her to obtain
relief, unless this has been contrived by the fraud of the creditors;
for a woman ought not to be considered as, in every respect, occupying
the position of a minor under twenty-five years of age who has been
overreached.

(1) When a woman wishes to recover property given in pledge by her at
the time she became surety for another, she should also receive the
crops and the offspring of slaves, and, if the property has been
deteriorated, a larger sum should be paid on this account. Where,
however, the creditor who received the pledge to secure the obligation
has sold it to a third party, the true opinion is that of those who
think that an action should be granted to her, even against a purchaser
in good faith; because the position of a purchaser should not be better
than that of the vendor.

(2) Likewise, if a woman sells a tract of land to the creditor of her
husband, and delivers it on condition that the purchaser will apply the
money received to the payment of her husband's debt, and she brings suit
to recover said land, she can be met by an exception on the ground of
property sold and delivered; but she can reply that the sale has been
made against the provisions of the Decree of the Senate.

This can be done whether the creditor himself purchases the property, or
whether he has employed someone else to do so, in order that the woman
may be deprived of it in this manner. The same rule applies where the
woman has transferred her property, not in behalf of her husband, but in
behalf of some other debtor.

(3) Where a woman, to avoid binding herself for another, directs a
third party to do this for her, will the Decree of the Senate apply to
this person who has acted at the request of the woman? The entire
substance of the Decree of the Senate has reference to the denial of the
suit against the woman herself, and I think a distinction should be made
here; as, for instance, where a creditor, to whom I have bound myself at
the direction of a woman, has devised this plan for the purpose of
evading the Decree of the Senate, as the woman does not seem to have
bound herself in violation of that Decree, but offered someone else; he
should be barred by an exception based on fraud committed against the
Decree of the Senate. If, however, he should be ignorant of the facts,
but I should be aware of them, then, if I bring an action on mandate
against the woman, I will be barred, but I will still be liable to the
creditor.

(4) Where a woman is ready to join issue in behalf of the party for
whom she obligated herself, in order that an action may not be granted
against the first debtor, as she can plead the exception based on the
Decree of the Senate, she must give security that she will not avail
herself of the exception, and then proceed to trial.

(5) A woman is also understood to bind herself for another, even when
she does this for one who cannot be bound; as, for instance, where she
obligates herself for a slave belonging to another, but her obligation
will be extinguished if the action should be restored against the master
of the slave.

* TITLE II. Concerning Set-Off.

1. *Modestinus, Pandects, Book VI.*

Set-off is a contribution made between a debt and a credit.

2. *Julianus, Digest, Book XC.*

Any one can bar his creditor, who is also his debtor, when he brings an
action against him if he is prepared to set off his claim.

3. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XXV.*

Set-off is therefore necessary, because it is more to our interest not
to pay, than to bring an action to recover what has been paid.

4. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book III.*

The opinion of Neratius, which is also held by Pomponius, is correct,
namely: that what the principal debtor can retain as set-off the surety
is released from liability for, by operation of law, in every contract;
just as if when I bring suit for the entire amount against a debtor I do
not proceed properly, and thus the security is not liable in strict law
for a larger amount than the principal debtor can be compelled to pay as
a judgment.

5. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book IX.*

Where a claim is demanded from a surety, it is perfectly just for the
latter to choose whether he prefers to set off what is due to himself

or what is due to the principal debtor. He should also be heard if he
wishes to make a set-off against the claims of both,

6. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXX.*

Whatever is due in consequence of a natural obligation can also become
the subject of set-off.

7. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXVIII.*

What is due at a certain time cannot be set off before the time arrives,
even though it may be necessary for it to be paid.

(1) Where the judge does not consider the set-off, the right of action
is saved to the creditor, for an exception based on the ground of a
decision rendered cannot be interposed.

I hold that the case is different if the judge has refused to consider
the set-off on the ground that no debt existed; for then an exception
based on a decision rendered will prejudice my case.

8. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book IX.*

That also is included in a set-off for the recovery of which suit has
already been brought against the plaintiff, in order to prevent the
condition of the more diligent party from becoming worse if the set-off
should be refused him.

9. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.*

Where a partnership has been contracted with a son under paternal
control or a slave, and the father or the master brings suit, we include
the whole amount in a set-off; although if we should bring suit, only
that which has reference to the *peculium* must be made good.

(1) But where suit is brought against a son under paternal control, the
question arises whether the son can, by way of set-off, claim, what is
owing to the father? It is better to hold that he can, because there is
only one contract, but this should be done under the condition that he
gives security that his father will ratify his act, that is to say, that
he will not, in the future demand what his son has set off.

10. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXIII.*

Where two of us, being partners, have been guilty of the same negligence
in matters affecting the partnership, it must be said that we cease to
be bound to one another, set-off for the negligence in this instance,
taking place by operation of law. In like manner, it is held that, where
one partner has appropriated something which belongs to the common
property and the other has been guilty of such negligence that it may be
estimated at the same amount, set-off is held to have taken place, as
well as the release of liability of both parties to one another by
operation of law.

(1) Therefore, where anyone, being able to make a set-off pays, he can
bring suit to recover the money as having been paid when it was

not due.

(2) Whenever a right of action arises from a breach of the law, as, for
instance, from theft and other offences, if only a suit involving

money is brought, a set-off can be admitted. The same rule applies where
an action is brought for the recovery of stolen property. But if a party
is sued in a noxal action, he can claim a set-off.

(3) Set-off can also take place in stipulations which resemble certain
forms of action, that is to say, prætorian ones; and, according to
Julianus, set-off can be claimed as well with reference to a stipulation
itself, as in the action based upon it.

11. *The Same, On the Edict, Book XXXII.*

When one party owes another a sum of money without interest, and the
latter owes the other a sum bearing interest; it was decreed by the
Divine Severus that interest was not due on the sums owed to one another
by the two parties respectively.

12. *The Same, On the Edict, Book LXIV.*

This law is applicable not only to the affairs of private individuals,
but also those connected with the Treasury. Where, however, the money
borrowed by the parties from one another bears interest, but the
interest is at different rates, a set-off can, nevertheless, take place
with reference to the sums due to the parties respectively.

13. *The Same, On the Edict, Book LXVI.*

Labeo says, and not without reason, that where a set-off is expressly
intended to be made against a certain claim, opposition should not be
made to its application to other claims.

14. *Javolenus, On Cassius, Book XV.*

Any claim that can be destroyed by an exception cannot be included in a
set-off.

15. *The Same, Epistles, Book II.*

I stipulated for a certain sum of money to be paid by Titius at a
certain place, he demands of me a sum of money which I owe him; I ask
whether the interest I had in having the amount paid to me in a certain
place, as aforesaid, should be included in the set-off? The answer was,
that if Titius makes the demand, the sum also which he promised to pay
in a certain place must be included in the set-off; but this must be
done with reference to his case also, that is to say, the interest
Titius had in having the sum of money owing to him paid in a place
agreed upon must be taken into consideration.

16. *Papinianus, Questions, Book III.*

Where a soldier has two heirs, one of whom inherits his *peculium
castrense*, and the other the remainder of his property, a party who is
indebted to one of the heirs, who wishes to set off what is due to him
from the other, shall not be heard.

(1) Where a party against whom judgment has been rendered in favor of
Titius, brings an action against the same Titius within the time granted
for the execution of the judgment, who, himself, had previously had
judgment rendered against him in favor of the other

party, set-off will be admitted; for it is one thing for the day of the
obligation not to arrive, and another to grant time for payment through
motives of humanity.

17. *The Same, Opinions, Book I.*

An ædile, who has had judgment rendered against him because he
distributed a smaller supply of provisions during his term of office
than he should have done, cannot be held to be a debtor for money spent
for grain; he will therefore be entitled to set-off.

18. *The Same, Opinions, Book III.*

Where an agent is appointed to conduct his own case in court, and, after
issue has been joined, suit is brought against him for a loan, he will
justly be entitled to a set-off.

(1) A creditor is not obliged to set off what he owes to anyone else
than his debtor, even though the creditor of him in whose behalf the
party is sued for his own debt may desire to make use of a set-off.

19. *The Same, Opinions, Book XI.*

Where a debtor who has paid a tax to a public slave, but without the
consent of those to whom he should properly have paid the debt, the
former obligation will continue to be in force; but a set-off will be
granted to the extent of the *peculium* which the public slave has in
his possession.

20. *The Same, Opinions, Book XIII.*

Where a person having charge of furnishing supplies to troops in an
expedition, has judgment rendered against him on this account, it is
held that he cannot retain the money by the right of set-off, as it is
not subject to it.

21. *Paulus, Questions, Book I.*

Since it has generally been held that what persons owe one another is
set off by mere operation of law, if the agent of a person who is absent
is sued, he need not give security that his act will be ratified,
because nothing can be set off, but a smaller sum can be demanded from
him in the beginning.

22. *Scævola, Questions, Book II.*

If you owe anyone ten thousand sesterces or a slave, whichever he may
choose, set-off of the debt will be admitted, if he states openly which
he prefers.

23. *Paulus, Opinions, Book IX.*

Where a guardian makes a demand in the name of his wards for what is due
to them, the debtor cannot ask that his debt be set-off against one that
the guardian himself owes him.

24. *The Same, Decrees, Book III.*

The Emperor ordered that a party should be heard who desired to prove
that an amount was owing to him from the Treasury equal to that for
which he himself was sued.

* TITLE III. Concerning the Direct and Contrary Actions On Deposit.

1. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

A deposit is what is given to another for safe-keeping. It is derived
from the word *ponere*, to place, and the preposition *de* adds to the
meaning of the term, and indicates that everything which pertains to the
safe-keeping of the article in question is entrusted to the good faith
of the party.

(1) The Prætor says: "Where property has been deposited, I will grant
an action for simple damages, for any other cause than a tumult, a fire,
the ruin of a building, or a shipwreck. I will grant one for double
damages against the depositary in those cases which are mentioned above.
I will grant one for simple damages against the heir of him who is
alleged to have been guilty of bad faith with reference to the property
deposited, and I will grant an action for double damages where the heir
himself has been guilty of fraud."

(2) The Prætor, very properly placed by themselves those cases of
deposit which result from necessity occasioned by accidental
circumstances, and which do not depend upon the will of the party making
the same.

(3) A person is understood to have made a deposit on account of a
tumult, or of a fire, or for other causes, when he has no other reason
to make it than the imminent danger arising from the above mentioned
catastrophes.

(4) This distinction of causes is reasonable, since when anyone relies
upon the faith of the depositary, and the deposit is not returned, he
should be content with an action for the mere recovery of the property,
or its value. When, however, he makes a deposit through necessity, the
crime of perfidy increases in its seriousness, and the public welfare
demands retribution, for it is injurious to violate a trust in cases of
this kind.

(5) The accessories to property which is deposited are not included;
as, for instance, where a slave who is clothed is deposited this does
not apply to his garments, nor is a halter deposited with a horse, for
the horse alone is deposited.

(6) If it is agreed upon that the party shall be responsible for
negligence with reference to the deposit, the agreement is valid, for
the law of contracts depends upon the agreement.

(7) It will not be held that damage resulting from fraud shall not be
made good, even if this should be agreed upon; for a contract of this
kind is contrary to good faith and good morals, and therefore should not
be observed.

(8) Where clothing given to the keeper of a bath to be taken care of is
lost, if he received no compensation for the care of it, I am of the
opinion that he will be liable for the deposit only where he has been
guilty of bad faith; but if he received compensation, an action can be
brought against him on the ground of hiring.

(9) Where anyone compels a slave, who has been entrusted to him for
safe-keeping, to work in a mill, and he receives any remuneration for
guarding him, I think that an action on hiring will lie against the
miller. If, however, I myself received pay for the slave whom the miller
took into the mill, suit can be brought against me for leasing him.
Where the labor of the slave was set off against the compensation for
his custody, a certain kind of leasing and hiring arises, but because no
money is paid, an action will be granted on the terms of the contract.
If, however, the party furnished the slave nothing else but food, and no
agreement was made with reference to his labor, an action on deposit
will lie.

(10) In leasing and hiring, and in matters in which an action should be
granted on the terms of the contract, the parties who received the slave
will be responsible for fraud and negligence; but, if they only
furnished him with food, they will merely be responsible for fraud,
since, (as Pomponius says), we must follow what was prescribed or agreed
upon, provided we know what it is; and if anything was prescribed, the
parties who received the slave will only be responsible for any fraud
which is involved in the deposit.

(11) If I request you to take some article of mine to Titius, in order
that he may take care of it; Pomponius asks by what action I can
institute proceedings against you? He thinks that I would be entitled to
an action on mandate against you, but to one on deposit against the
party who received the property; if, however, he received it in your
name, you and he will be liable to me in an action on mandate, and he
will be liable to you in an action on deposit, and this right of action
you can assign to me when I sue you on mandate.

(12) Where I have given you any property on condition that you will
take care of it if Titius should not be willing to receive it, and he
does not receive it; it should be considered whether merely an action on
deposit, or also one on mandate will lie. Pomponius is in doubt on this
point, but I think that an action on mandate will lie, because the
mandate is of greater scope with reference to the condition of safe
custody.

(13) Pomponius also asks if I direct you to keep safely some property
received from another in my name, and you should do this, will you be
liable to an action on mandate, or to one on deposit? He rather holds
that there should be an action on mandate, because this is the first
contract.

(14) Pomponius also asks, where you are willing for me to make a
deposit with you, and you direct it to be made with your freedman,
whether I can proceed against you by an action on deposit? He says if I
had deposited the property in your name, that is to say, with the
understanding that you are to take charge of it, I will have an action
against you on deposit, but if you persuade me that I should rather make
a deposit with the freedman, no action will lie against you, since the
action on deposit must be brought against him; or will you be liable on
mandate because I was transacting my own affairs? But if you directed me
to make the deposit with the freedman at your risk, I do

not see why an action on mandate will not lie. Labeo says that it is
evident that if you have given security, the surety will, by all means
be liable, not only if the party who received the deposit was guilty of
fraud, but even if he is not, the property is still in his hands; for
what if he, with whom the deposit was made, should become insane, or a
ward, or should die without leaving an heir, a possessor of, or a
successor to his estate? He will, therefore, be liable to make good what
is customary in an action on deposit.

(15) The question arises whether an action on deposit can be granted
against a ward with whom a deposit has been made without the authority
of his guardian? It must be held that he can bring an action on the
ground of fraud, if the deposit was made with him when he was old enough
to be guilty of the offence, for an action will be granted against him
for the amount by which he would have been pecuniarily benefited if he
had not been guilty of fraud.

(16) Where the property deposited is returned in a deteriorated
condition, an action on deposit can be granted, just as if it had not
been returned at all; for when property is returned in a worse condition
than it was in the first place, it can be said that it has not been
returned at all on account of fraud.

(17) If my slave has made a deposit, I will, nevertheless, be entitled
to an action on deposit.

(18) If I make a deposit with a slave, and bring suit against him after
he has been manumitted, Marcellus says that the action will not lie;
although we are accustomed to hold that anyone should be liable for
fraud committed even in servitude, because both crimes and damages
follow the person of the guilty, and therefore, in this instance
recourse must be had to other actions which can be brought.

(19) This action will lie in favor of the possessor of property and
other possessors, as well as in favor of him to whom restitution of an
estate is granted under the Trebellian Decree of the Senate.

(20) Not only is fraud previously committed involved in an action on
deposit, but also that which may be committed subsequently, that is to
say, after issue has been joined.

(21) Hence, Neratius states that if property which has been deposited
is lost without fraudulent contrivance, and is recovered after issue has
been joined, the defendant will nevertheless, properly be required to
make restitution, and that he should not be released from liability
unless he does so.

Neratius also says that even though the action on deposit may have been
brought against you at a time when you did not have power to make
restitution, as, for instance, when the warehouses were closed; still,
if you had power to make restitution before judgment was rendered
against you, you should be condemned unless you do so, because the
property is in your hands; for inquiry should then be made whether you
acted in bad faith since you did not have the property.

(22) It is stated by Julianus in the Thirteenth Book of the Digest,
that anyone who deposits property can immediately bring an action on
deposit, since he who received it is guilty of an act of bad faith
because
he does not return it when demanded. Marcellus, however, stated that he
who does not return it to the person who claims it, cannot always be
held to have acted fraudulently; for what if the property was in the
province, or in a warehouse which could not be opened at the time
judgment was rendered, or the condition upon which the deposit depended
had not been fulfilled?

(23) There is no doubt that this action is a *bona-fide* one.

(24) And, for this reason, the crops, all accessories, and the yield of
flocks should be embraced in this action, lest only the bare article
itself should be included.

(25) If you sold the property which was deposited, and you subsequently
purchased it on account of the deposit, even if it should afterwards be
destroyed without bad faith on your part, you will be liable for the
deposit, because you once acted fraudulently when you sold the
property.

(26) In an action on deposit also, a judicial oath is taken with
reference to the value of the property.

(27) It seems to be perfectly just that I should be granted this
action, not only if my slave, but if one who is serving me as a slave in
good faith, deposited the property, if he deposited it as belonging to
me.

(28) In like manner, I can bring this action if I have an usufruct in a
slave, and what he deposited was part of his *peculium*, which belonged
to me or was my property.

(29) Moreover, if a slave belonging to an estate makes a deposit, the
heir, who afterwards enters upon the estate, can bring the action.

(30) Where a slave makes a deposit, whether he lives or dies, the
master can properly bring this action; if, however, the slave is
manumitted he cannot bring it. But if the slave should be alienated, he
who owned him at the time when the deposit was made will still have a
right of action, for the beginning of the contract must be taken into
account.

(31) Where a slave belonging to two parties makes a deposit, each of
his masters can bring an action on deposit for his share.

(32) If you restore property to Titius which has been deposited with
you by a slave of whom you thought Titius to be the master, when he was
not; you will not be liable to an action on deposit, so Celsus says,
because there is no fraud on your part; but the master of the slave can
bring an action against Titius to whom the property was delivered. If he
produces the property, it can be recovered by an action, but if he used
it up when he knew it belonged to someone else, judgment will be
rendered against him, because he acted fraudulently to avoid remaining
in possession.

(33) The following question is very appropriately asked by Julianus. If
a servant deposited money with me in order for me to pay it to his
master for his freedom, and I paid the money, will I be liable to an
action on deposit? He states in the Thirteenth Book of the Digest that
if I pay money in this manner which was, as it were, deposited with me
for this purpose, and I notify you of the fact, you will not be. entitled to an action on deposit, because you, knowing the fact,
received the money, and therefore I have not been guilty of fraud; but
if I pay the money, as if it was mine, for the purpose of obtaining the
freedom of the slave, I will be liable.

This opinion appears to me to be correct; for, in this instance, not
only did the depositary not restore the property without bad faith, but
he did not restore it at all, for it is one thing to restore it, and
another to pay it out as if it was one's own.

(34) Where money has been deposited with you with the understanding
that you can use it, if you think best, you will be liable to an action
on deposit before you make use of it.

(35) It frequently happens that property or money which is deposited,
is left at the risk of the party to whom it is entrusted, for example,
where the parties have especially agreed to this. Julianus states,
however, that if anyone has offered himself as a depositary, he assures
the risk of the deposit, so that he must be responsible not only for
fraud, but also for negligence and safe-keeping, but not for accidents.

(36) Where money is deposited in a bag which is sealed, and one of the
heirs of the person who made the deposit appears and claims it; it
should be considered in what way the depositary must satisfy him. The
money ought to be taken out of the bag either in the presence of the
Prætor, or in that of respectable persons, and the claimant paid in
proportion to his share of the estate. If, however, the depositary
breaks the seal, this will not be done contrary to the intention of the
deposit, since it took place by the authority of the Prætor, or in the
presence of respectable persons. So far as to what remains in his hands
is concerned, if he wishes to retain it after new seals have been placed
upon it either by the Prætor or by the parties in whose presence the
other seals were broken he can do so; or if he refuses to retain it, it
may be deposited in a temple.

Where, however, the property is such that it cannot be divided, the
depositary should deliver it all to the claimant, after he has given
proper security that he will be responsible for all above his share; but
where security is not furnished, the depositary should place the
property in a temple, and be released from liability to any action.

(37) Another example is given by Julianus in the Thirteenth Book of the
Digest. He says that if the depositor dies, and two persons appear
disputing with each other, each one asserting that he is the sole heir,
the property should be delivered to him who is ready to defend it
against the other claimant, that is to say, he who has received the
deposit. If, however, neither will accept this responsibility, he says
that it is most convenient that he should not be compelled by the Prætor
to undertake the defence. Therefore, it is necessary for the property to
be deposited in some temple until the right to the estate is judicially
decided.

(38) Where anyone, in the presence of several persons reads a will
which has been deposited with him, Labeo says that an action on deposit
can properly be brought against him on account of the will; but I am of
the opinion that an action for injury can also be brought, if the contents of the will were read in the presence of those parties with the
intention that the secret provisions made by the testator should be -
divulged.

(39) If a depredator or a thief makes a deposit, Marcellus states in
the Sixth Book of the Digest that either of them will lawfully be
entitled to an action on deposit; for it is to his interest to have it,
because he may be held liable.

(40) Where anyone demands a deposit of gold or silver should the
article only be designated or should the weight also be included? The
better opinion is that both should be included; as, for instance, the
dish, or cup, or bowl should be mentioned, and the material and weight
should be added. Where, however, the article is purple which has not
been used, or wool, the weight should in like manner be added; except
where uncertainty exists as to the amount of the weight, and recourse
is had to an oath.

(41) Where a chest which has been sealed is deposited, but the chest
alone is claimed, should its contents be included? Trebatius says that
the chest can be claimed, and that an action should not be brought for
the individual articles of the deposit; but if the property is first
exhibited and then deposited, the description of the clothing must be
added. Labeo, however, says that the party who deposited the chest is
held to have also deposited the separate articles contained therein, and
therefore we must bring suit for the property. Then what if the party
who received the deposit was ignorant that the property was there? It
does not make much difference, since he received the deposit; and I
think that an action can be brought for the property forming the
deposit, even though the chest was sealed when placed in the hands of
the depositary.

(42) It is established that a son under paternal control is liable for
a deposit, because he is liable to other actions; but suit can also be
brought against his father, but only with reference to the son's
*peculium.* The same rule applies to a slave, for he can be sued along
with his master. It is evident, as Julianus stated and as it appears to
us, that if suit is brought on account of persons who are under the
control of anyone, the case may be tried; so that if any deceit or fraud
has been committed by him under whose authority they are, or by the
parties with whom the contract was made, their bad faith may become
apparent.

(43) Where property is deposited with two persons, an action can be
brought against either of them, nor will one of them be released if suit
is brought against the other, for they are discharged from liability not
by the choice of the depositor but by payment. Hence, if both are guilty
of fraud, and one of them pays the amount of the claim, the other cannot
be sued; just as in the case of two guardians. Where, however, one of
them can either not pay anything, or an amount less than the claim,
recourse can be had to the other.

The same rule applies where one of them was not guilty of fraud, and
therefore was discharged, for, in this instance, recourse can be had to
the other.

(44) Where, however, two parties made a deposit, and both of them bring
suit, if, indeed, they made the deposit with the understanding that one
could remove all of it, he can bring an action for the entire amount;
but if the understanding was that only the share in which each of them
was interested could be removed by him, then it must be said that
judgment should be rendered against a depositary for the share of each.

(45) If I make a deposit with you with the understanding that it shall
be returned after your death, I can bring an action on deposit against
you, and against your heir, for I can change my mind, and claim the
deposit before your death.

(46) Hence, if I make a deposit with you to be returned after my death,
both I and my heir can bring an action on deposit, if I have changed my
mind.

(47) For the reason that only bad faith is involved in this proceeding,
the question arose whether, if the heir sold the property deposited with
the testator or lent to him for use, he being ignorant that the said
property had been deposited or lent, will he be liable. For the reason
that he did not act in bad faith, he will not be liable for the
property. Will he, nevertheless, be liable at least for the price of it
which came into his hands? The better opinion is that he will be liable,
for he was guilty of bad faith in not giving up what came into his
hands.

2. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXI.*

But what if he had not yet collected the purchase-money, or had sold the
property for a smaller sum than he should have done? He must only assign
his rights of action.

3. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXI.*

It is clear that, if he could buy the property back, and return it, and
does not wish to do so, he is not free from negligence; just as if he
was unwilling to return it if it had been bought back or had come into
his possession in any other way, alleging as an excuse that he sold it
once while ignorant of the facts.

4. *Paulus, On Plautius, Book V.*

Even if the person is not the heir, but thinks that he is, and sells the
property, the profit he has obtained must be wrested from him in the
same way.

5. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

The counter action of deposit is granted in favor of the party with whom
the deposit is alleged to have been made, and in this action it is not
necessary for an oath to be taken as to the amount; for proceedings are
instituted, not on account of broken faith, but in order that the party
who received the deposit may be indemnified.

(1) An action on deposit can be brought against a sequestrator, if,
however, an agreement is made with the latter that he should produce the
property deposited, at a certain place, and he does not do so, it is
clear that he will be liable. But, if the agreement had reference to
several places, it is in his discretion at which of them he will produce
it, ' but where no agreement was made, he must be notified to produce
the property before the Prætor.

(2) If the sequestrator wishes to relinquish his office, what course
must be taken? Pomponius says that he must appear before the Prætor and
having with his consent notified the parties who selected him, he must
return the property to the one who appeared.

I do not think, however, that this is always correct, for he frequently
should not be allowed to relinquish an office which he has once
undertaken, which would be contrary to the understanding with which the
deposit was made, unless a very just cause arises; and when it is
permitted, the property should be very rarely restored to the party who
appears, but it ought to be deposited in some temple in accordance with
the decision of a court.

6. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book II.*

A deposit is properly made with a sequestrator which is delivered in its
entirety by several persons, to be kept safely and returned under a
certain condition.

7. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXX.*

Where a slave is deposited with a sequestrator in order that he may be
put to the torture, and because of his being chained or confined in an
uncomfortable place, he, induced by pity, released him; I am of the
opinion that this act very nearly resembles fraud, for, as he knew the
purpose for which the slave was destined, he displayed his compassion at
an improper time, since he should rather not have undertaken such a task
than to have been guilty of deceit.

(1) The action on deposit is granted for the whole amount against an
heir on account of the bad faith of the deceased, for even though we are
not usually liable for the fraudulent act of a deceased person, except
with reference to that portion of the estate which comes into our hands;
still, in this instance, the bad faith descends from a contract which
gives rise to an action to recover the property, and therefore a single
heir will be liable for the entire amount, but where there are several
heirs, each one will be liable for his share.

(2) Whenever bankers become bankrupt, the accounts of the depositors
must, in the first place, be considered; that is to say, those of such
as have money on deposit which they have not placed at interest with the
said bankers, or left with them to make use of. Therefore, if the
property of the bankers is sold, the depositors will be entitled to
their money before the privileged creditors; but this will only be done
where the parties have not afterwards received interest, as they will be
considered to have renounced their deposits.

(3) The question also arises whether the order in which the parties
made their deposits shall be considered, or whether all the deposits
together shall be taken into account. And it has been established that
they were all on the same footing, for this has been settled by an
Imperial Rescript.

8. *Papinianus, Questions, Book IX.*

The depositary can exercise his privilege, not only with reference to
the remainder of the deposit which may be found among the assets of the
banker, but also with reference to all other property of the banker who
has been guilty of fraud; and this rule has been adopted on the ground
of public utility. It is evident that the expenses necessarily incurred
are always preferred claims, for, after they have been deducted, it is
customary to make an appraisement of the property.

9. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book VII.*

Where, in the action on deposit, suit is brought against one of several
heirs on account of an act of the deceased, I must sue him for his share
of the estate; but if, on account of an offence which he has committed,
I do not sue him for a share, this is reasonable, because the measure of
damages has reference to the act of bad faith which the heir himself
committed.

10. *Julianus, On Minicius, Book II.*

The action on deposit does not lie against co-heirs who are not guilty
of fraud.

11. *Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XLI.*

Where a slave makes a deposit, the party with whom it is made is
authorized by good faith, and most justly, to return the property to the
slave; for it is not consistent with good faith to refuse to deliver
what anyone has received, but it should be returned to him from whom he
obtained it, and this should be done in such a way as to restore it
without any bad faith, that is to say, that there may not be even a
suspicion of negligence.

Sabinus further explains this, by adding that there should be no cause
for the depositary to think that the master was unwilling for the
property to be returned to the slave; and this is correct, unless he was
influenced by some good reason to suspect the slave, but it is
sufficient if he displayed good faith. If, however, the slave had
previously been guilty of theft, and the party with whom the deposit was
made was ignorant of the fact, or believed that the master was not
unwilling for the delivery of the property, he will be released from
liability, for good faith is always required.

Not only will the depositary be released by returning the property to
the slave if the latter remained in servitude, but also if he was
manumitted or alienated, provided he did so for good and sufficient
reasons; for instance, if he returned it not knowing that the slave had
been manumitted or alienated. Pomponius states that the same rule should
be observed in the case of all debtors.

12. *Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XXII.*

Where a deposit was made in Asia to be returned at Rome, it is held that
the intention was that this should be at the expense of the
party who made the deposit, and not at that of him with whom it was.
placed.

(1) A deposit should be returned to the place in which it is found,
without any fraudulent act of the party with whom the property was
deposited. It, indeed, makes no difference where the deposit was made.
The same principles apply generally to all *bona fide* actions. It must
be said, however, that if the plaintiff wishes the property to be
transported to Rome at his expense and risk, he should be heard; for
this is also done in the action for production.

(2) An action on deposit can properly be brought against a
sequestrator, and it is also granted against his heir.

(3) Just as where property which must be delivered in compliance with
the terms of a stipulation or a will, is destroyed after issue has been
joined; so, also, a deposit from the day on which it was made will be at
the risk of the party in whose hands it was placed, if, at the time
issue was joined, the defendant could have restored it, but did not do
so.

13. *Paulus, On Sabinus, Book XXXI.*

Where a person refuses to return property, not to the owner of the same
but to someone who demands it, and whom he does not think to be the
genuine agent or heir of the person who made the deposit, he is not
guilty of bad faith. However, if he should afterwards learn that the
claimant had authority, an action can be brought against him, since he
now begins to be guilty of bad faith, if he refuses to return the
property.

(1) A personal action for recovery will also lie on account of property
deposited, but not before fraud has been committed; for no one is liable
to a personal action for recovery merely because he has received the
deposit, but only when he has been guilty of fraud.

14. *Gaius, On the Provincial Edict, Book IX.*

Where there are several heirs of the party who made the deposit it is
held that if the majority of them appear the property should be returned
to those who are present. The majority should be understood to mean, not
the larger number of persons, but the greater amount of the shares of
the estate, and proper security must be furnished.

(1) Whether proceedings are instituted against him with whom the
property was deposited or against his heir, and the property naturally
perished before a decision is rendered, for instance, if a slave whose
ownership was in dispute should die; Sabinus and Cassius say that the
party against whom the action was brought ought to be discharged,
because it is only just that the natural loss of the property should be
borne by the plaintiff, since it would have perished even if it had been
returned to him.

15. *Julianus, Digest, Book III.*

He who allows his own property to be deposited with him or requests
permission to use it, is not liable to an action on deposit or on one

of loan for use, just as in the case of a party who rents his own
property, or asks to hold it by sufferance, for he is not liable in
either instance.

16. *Africanus, Questions, Book VII.*

If he with whom you deposit property makes a deposit of the same with
another, and the latter is guilty of fraud; he with whom you deposited
the property will be liable for the bad faith of him with whom it was
subsequently deposited, to the extent that he must assign his rights of
action to him.

17. *Florentinus, Institutes, Book VII.*

It is lawful for several persons, just as it is for one, to make a
deposit; nevertheless, only several persons can make one with a
sequestrator, for this is done when property is in dispute, and
therefore, in this instance, each one is held to have made the deposit
in its entirety. The case is otherwise where several joint-owners
deposit property held in common.

(1) Ownership of the article deposited remains with the depositor, as
well as possession, unless it is deposited with a sequestrator; for then
the latter has possession; for in making the deposit it is the intention
that neither shall have possession during the time that it is so held.

18. *Neratius, Parchments, Book II.*

In case a deposit is made on account of a tumult, a fire, the
destruction of a house, or a shipwreck, the action brought against the
heir on account of the fraud of the deceased is for his share of the
estate, and for simple damages, and it also must be brought within a
year; but where it is brought against the heir himself it is granted for
the entire amount, for double damages, and without reference to time.

19. *Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XVII.*

Julianus and Marcellus are of the opinion that a son under paternal
control can properly bring an action on deposit.

20. *Paulus, On the Edict, Book XVIII.*

If you, without having been guilty of fraud, have lost property which
has been deposited with you, you will not be liable to an action on
deposit, nor should you give security to return the property if you
should again obtain possession of it. If, however, it should come into
your hands a second time, you will be liable to an action on deposit.

21. *The Same, On the Edict, Book LX.*

Where property has been deposited with a son under paternal control, and
he still retains it after having been emancipated, the father cannot be
sued on the *peculium* within a year, but the son can be.

(1) Trebatius goes still farther, for he thinks that if the deposit was
made with the slave, and he, having been manumitted, retains the
property, an action should be granted against him, and not against his
master; although an action is not granted against a manumitted person
in other cases.

22. *Marcellus, Digest, Book V.*

Where two heirs fraudulently interfere with property which has been
deposited with the deceased, they will, in some instances, only be
liable for a portion of the same, for if they divide ten thousand
*aurei* which were deposited with the deceased, and misappropriate five
thousand of them, and both are solvent, they will each be liable for
half, because the plaintiff has no further interest. But where they have
melted a plate or permitted this to be done by someone else, or have
committed any other kind of fraud, they can be sued for the entire
amount, just as if they themselves had been charged with the safekeeping
of the property; for it is certain that each one of them is guilty of
fraud, and unless they were liable for the whole amount, restoration of
the property could not take place. Nor does it appear absurd for one to
think that unless restitution of the entire property is made, he against
whom suit has been brought cannot be released but must have judgment
rendered against him, if the property was not restored in proportion of
the share of the estate to which he was heir.

23. *Modestinus, Differences, Book II.*

Where anyone is sued in an action on deposit, he can properly institute
proceedings before the same judge on account of food which has been
furnished a slave.

24. *Papinianus, Questions, Book IX.*

Lucius Titius to Sempronius Greeting: "I notify you by this letter
written by my own hand, that the hundred pieces of money which you
loaned to me this day, and which have been counted by the slave Stichus,
your agent, are in my hands, and that I will pay them to you on demand,
when and where you desire me to do so."

The question arises whether any increase by way of interest is to be
considered? I answered that an action on deposit will lie, for what is
the loaning of anything for use but the depositing of it? This is true,
if the intention was that the very same coins should be returned, for if
it was understood that only the amount should be paid, the agreement
exceeds the limits of the deposit.

If, in the case which has been stated, an action on deposit will not
lie, since it was only agreed to pay the same sum, and not the identical
coins, it is not easy to determine whether an account of the interest
should be taken. It has, in fact, been established that, in *bona fide*
actions, it is the duty of the judge to decide that, with reference to
interest, only such can be paid as the stipulation provides for. But is
contrary to good faith and the nature of a deposit, that interest should
be claimed before the party who granted the favor by receiving the
money, is in default in returning it. If, however, the agreement was
that interest should be paid from the beginning, the condition of the
contract shall be observed.

25. *The Same, Opinions, Book III.*

Where a father received the presents given to his daughter, who was her
own mistress, on the day of her betrothal, or afterwards, his heir can
properly be sued in an action on deposit to compel him to produce the
property.

(1) Anyone who converts to his own use money which had been deposited
with him, but not sealed up, with the understanding that he should
return the same amount, and should have judgment rendered against him,
in an action on deposit, for the interest from the time when he was in
default.

26. *Paulus, Opinions, Book IV.*

Publia Mævia, when about to depart to visit her husband, entrusted to
Gaia Seia a closed box containing clothing and written documents, and
addressed her as follows: "If I come back safe and sound you will return
this to me, but if anything should happen to me, give it to my son whom
I had by my first husband." The woman having died intestate, I wish to
know to whom the property which she had entrusted to the other should be
delivered, to her son, or to her husband? Paulus answered, to her son.

(1) Lucius Titius made the following statement: "I have received, and
have in my hands as a deposit the sum of ten thousand *denarii* of
silver, and I promise and bind myself to return all the said amount, as
agreed upon between us; and, in accordance with the contract entered
into, I will pay you every month four *oboli* for each pound by way of
interest, until payment of the entire sum has been made." I ask whether
interest can be demanded? Paulus answers that the contract to which
reference has been made exceeds the limit of a deposit of money, and
therefore, in accordance with the agreement, interest can be claimed in
an action on deposit.

(2) Titus, to the members of the family of Sempronius, Greeting: "I
have received from you the weight of about ten pieces of gold, two
discs, and a sealed sack, on which you owe me ten pieces, which you have
deposited with Titius, and you also owe ten to Trophimas; and you also
owe ten on an account of your father, and something more besides."

I ask whether any obligation arises from a written paper of this kind,
and especially anything which has reference to this money? The answer
was that, in fact, no obligation seems to have arisen from the letter
which was the object of the inquiry, but that it could only serve to
prove that a deposit of property was made. The judge must determine
whether the party, who bound himself for ten pieces of gold in the same
letter, can prove what he wrote.

27. *The Same, Opinions, Book VII.*

Lucius Titius had a daughter named Seia under his control, he gave her
in marriage to a slave named Pamphilus, who did not belong to him, and
he gave the latter the dowry, taking an acknowledgment from him that it
was only left in his hands by way of deposit; and then, the

master of the slave not having been notified of said deposit, the father
died, and soon afterwards Pamphilus, the slave, also.

I ask, by means of what action can Seia recover the money, as she was
the heir of her father? Paulus answered that, since the dowry was not
actually constituted, the money could be recovered by an action *De
peculio* on the ground of a deposit. 28. *Scævola, Opinions, Book I.*

Quintus Cæcilius Candidus wrote a letter to Paccius Rogatianus in the
following terms: "Cæcilius Candidus to his friend Paccius Rogatianus,
Greeting. I notify you by this letter that I have received and entered
in my account-book the receipts of the twenty-five pieces of money which
you have remitted to me, and at the first opportunity I will take care
that this money shall not be idle, that is to say, that you
will receive interest thereon."

The question arose whether interest can also be collected on account of
this letter. I answered that interest will be due in a *bona fide*
action, if the party collected it, or used the money for his own
purposes.

29. *Paulus, Sentences, Book II.*

If I make a deposit of silver in a bag or sealed, and the person with
whom I deposited the same makes use of it without my consent, I will be
entitled to an action on deposit, as well as one for theft against him.

(1) If he with whom the deposit was made uses it with my permission, he
will be compelled to pay me interest on this account, just as in other
*bona fide* actions.

30. *Neratius, Opinions, Book I.*

If your surety has judgment rendered against him for damages on account
of property deposited with you, the said property becomes yours.

31. *Tryphoninus, Disputations, Book IX.*

Good faith, which is required in contracts, demands the greatest degree
of equity; but should we estimate that equity with reference to the Law
of Nations, or in accordance with civil and prætorian precepts? For
instance, a party accused of a capital crime deposited a hundred *aurei
*with you, he was banished, and his property confiscated. Should the
deposit of this money be returned to him, or be placed in the Public
Treasury? If we only have in view the Law of Nature and of Nations, it
should be returned to him who gave it; but if the Civil Law and the
provisions of legal enactments are considered, it must be turned over to
the Public Treasury, for he who has deserved ill of the people should be
oppressed by poverty, in order to serve as an example to others for the
prevention of crime.

(1) Another point comes up here for examination, that is, whether we
should hold that good faith ought to be limited to the parties who have
contracted with one another, without paying any attention to other
persons who are interested in the matter under consideration. For
example, a thief deposited with Seius, who was not aware of his
criminality, some plunder which he had taken from me, should Seius
restore the property to the thief, or to me?

If we only consider the giver and the receiver, good faith requires that
he who gave the property in charge of another should receive it; but if
we look at the equity of the matter which is due to all the persons
concerned in this transaction, that should be returned to me of which I
have been deprived by a most wicked act. I believe that to be justice
which gives to every one his own, in such a way that any person who has
a better claim may not be deprived of it. Therefore, if I do not appear
to claim the property, it must, nevertheless, be returned to him who
deposited it, even though he did so after having wrongfully obtained it.
Marcellus states the same thing with reference to a depredator and a
thief.

Where, however, the thief, not being aware who was the father or master
of the son or the slave from whom he took the property, deposits it with
either of them, they being ignorant of the facts, this does not
constitute a deposit according to the Law of Nations; because the
character of a deposit is such that a man's own property must be given
as that of another, for safe keeping, to some person who is not its
owner. If a thief deposits with me my own property, which he took
without my knowledge, I being ignorant of his crime, it is rightly held
that no deposit is made; for it is not in accordance with good faith for
an owner to be compelled to surrender his own property to a thief. But
where, in a case of this kind, property placed on deposit is given up by
its owner who was not aware of the facts, a personal action for the
recovery of something that was not due will lie.

32. *Celsus, Digest, Book XL*

While a statement of Nerva that gross negligence is fraudulent, is not
accepted by Proculus, it seems to me to be perfectly true. For, even if
anyone is not as diligent as human nature requires, still, he will not
be free from fraud if he does not display that solicitude with respect
to a deposit which is customary with him; for good faith will not be
maintained if he shows less diligence with reference to said deposit
than he exhibits concerning his own property.

33. *Labeo, Last Epitomes of Javolenus, Book VI.*

Your slave deposited, in sequestration, a certain sum of money with
Attius at the house of Mævius, on condition that it should be delivered
to you if you proved that it was yours, but if you did not, that it
should be delivered to Attius. I stated that suit could be brought for
an unascertained amount against him with whom the money was deposited,
that is, for its production, and having been produced, an action could
be brought for its recovery, because your slave, in making the deposit,
could not prejudice your rights.

34. *The Same, Probabilities, Book II.*

You can bring an action on deposit against anyone who refuses to return
your deposit on any other terms than that you pay him money, even though
he may be willing to return it, on this condition, without delay and
uninjured.
