# -*- mode: org -*-


THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS. BOOK XXXII.


TITLE I.
CONCERNING LEGACIES AND TRUSTS. 1. Ulpianus, Trusts, Book I.
Where anyone is not certain of his condition, for instance, whether he is a
captive in the hands of the enemy, or merely detained by robbers, he cannot
execute a will. If, however, he should be ignorant of his legal rights, and
thinks, through mistake, that because he has been captured by robbers, he is a
slave of the enemy; or if, having been sent on an embassy, he believes that he
does not differ from a captive, it is certain that he cannot create a trust,
for the reason that he is unable to make a will who is in doubt as to whether
he can do so or not.
(1) Where a son under paternal control, or a slave creates a trust by will, it
will not be valid. If, however, the case is proposed that either of them should
die after being manumitted, we constantly decide that the trust should be held
to have been left, just as if it had been created at the time of the party's
death; that is if his intention had continued to exist after the manumission.
Let no one suppose that we adopt this same rule with reference to wills,
because whenever a will is not valid, none of its contents are valid either,
but it is otherwise where anyone leaves a trust.
(2) Those who have been interdicted from the use of water and fire, as well as
persons who have been deported, cannot create a trust by will, because they
have not testamentary capacity when they are exiled.
(3) We must understand those to be deported to whom the Emperor has assigned
some island as a residence; or such as he has banished by a written order. But
before the Emperor has confirmed the sentence of the Governor, no one is
considered to have lost his civil rights. Hence, if he should die before this
is done, he is held to have died a citizen, and any trust which he left before
he was sentenced will be valid, or one which he created after sentence was
imposed upon him, and before the Emperor confirmed it, will also be valid;
because up to this time he was still in the possession of his privileges as a
citizen.
(4) So far as those are concerned who have been deported by the Praetorian
Prefect, or his deputy who has cognizance of cases under the direction of the
Emperor, or also the Urban Prefect (because the right of deportation was
likewise granted to him by a Rescript1of the Divine Severus and our Sovereign)
they immediately forfeit their civil rights, and therefore it is evident that
they have neither testamentary capacity nor legal power to create a trust.

(5) Where anyone who has been deported to an island makes a codicil while
there, and having been restored to the enjoyment of his civil rights by the
favor of the Emperor, dies, leaving the same codicil unchanged, it can be
maintained that the trust will be valid, provided the party always had the same
intention.
(6) Moreover, it should be noted that those can be charged with a trust into
whose hands any of a person's estate is to pass when he dies, whether it is
given to them, or whether they are not deprived of it.
1 The Imperial Roman Constitutions, or Placita Principum,were opinions or
decisions of the Emperors, which, emanating directly from the throne, were
invested with the force and authority of law. They were, to all intents and
purposes, legislative acts, that, like decrees sometimes presumed to derive
their validity from the vote of the Senate, were, in fact, merely the thinly
disguised manifestations of autocratic power as embodied in the sacred person
of the Emperor. There were several kinds of Constitutions, which differed more
or less from one another either in their phraseology, their object, or the
method of their communication or promulgation.
The principal of these were the Rescripts, or answers to questions, generally
of a legal nature, propounded for solution sometimes by ordinary citizens, but
usually by lawyers and judges, or the great dignitaries of the Empire. When
addressed to officials they were issued as letters, and were styled
epistolae;when the inquiry was made by a public corporation or association, the
response was of a more formal character, and was designated sanctio
pragmatica;if the recipient was a private individual, it was called
adnotatio,for the reason that it was inscribed upon the edge of the petition
whose contents were presented for interpretation. Rescripts were, for the most
part, of restricted application, having reference only to the matter upon which
an opinion was solicited, hence they were not considered as general legal
precedents, although it would appear that at times, they were cited as such.
They did not annul pre-existing enactments, unless this was explicitly stated,
being merely explanatory of obscure, conflicting, or ambiguous points of law.

The Edict was a Constitution which extended to all, or a portion of the States
subject to Imperial jurisdiction. It implied the most authoritative and far
reaching exercise of the despotism of the Caesars.
The Decree was a decision by the Emperor of a question that had been submitted
to him on appeal. It was not necessarily final, being, in some cases,
interlocutory. The legislation of Justinian rendered Decrees available as
precedents, a quality which they did not heretofore possess.
Mandates were instructions furnished public functionaries, such as Governors
and Prefects, for their guidance in the performance of their official duties.
They were only issued where conditions rendered this necessary, and were local
in their character, being enforceable as laws only in the districts where they
were promulgated.
The Privilege, a term of extremely broad signification, was of the nature of a
private law, by which an unusual right was conceded, or the infliction of a
penalty not recognized by existing legislation was authorized. Its limited
application, of course, made its use as a precedent impossible. --- ED.
(7) Not only the next of kin who have obtained possession of an estate by the
judgment of the Praetor, but also those entitled to it on the ground of
intestacy, can be charged with a trust.
(8) A child who is not yet born can be charged with a trust, if, after it is
born, it will become our successor.
(9) It may undoubtedly be said that if anyone should die intestate, and leave a
trust to be executed by the heir entitled to succeed him in the first degree,
and the latter should reject the estate, and the succession pass to the next
degree, the heir will not be required to execute the trust. This rule Our
Emperor stated in a Rescript.
(10) If a trust should be left by a freedman to be executed by his patron, and
he should die, and one of his children should be permitted to take possession
of his property, the same rule will apply.
2. Gaius, Trusts, Book I.
A trust cannot be left to be executed by a son who has been passed over in a
will, even though he should be the heir-at-law.
3. Ulpianus, Trusts, Book I.
Where a woman made a stipulation with reference to her dowry, and her husband,
having taken a receipt from her therefor in order that she might charge him
with a trust, it must be said that the trust should be executed, for he is
considered to have received something from his wife. This is the case where the
woman gives a receipt to her husband, being about to make him a donation mortis
causa.But where she increases her dowry in favor of her husband, mortis
causa,or marries him again after separation, it may be held that the trust can
be executed by him.
(1) Julianus said that if a slave should be bequeathed to me, and I am asked to
manumit him, I cannot be charged with a trust, that is to say, if I am
requested to do so absolutely; for if I am asked under a condition, or within a
certain period, 1 will be liable on account of the profit which I will derive
from the labors of the slave in the meantime, and upon this point Julianus
entertained no doubt.
(2) Where anyone owes some property to a certain person, as the result of a
stipulation, and bequeaths him the property, he cannot charge him with a trust,
although the creditor may be held to have benefited by the legacy, because
ownership vests at once, and does not wait for an action based on the
stipulation.
Perhaps someone might say that he would profit by the expenses of the
stipulation, which he would have to pay if the matter should come into court;
but it can, by no means, be held that he can be charged with a trust.
(3) If I should transfer to you, mortis causa,the usufruct of certain property
of which you have the ownership, it may be held that I can charge you with a
trust, nor will the point that the usufruct is ordinarily extinguished by death
have any weight, since we must consider the benefits which the owner will
obtain during the intermediate time that the party who made the donation
survives.
(4) If, however, I should release the pledge of my debtor, mortis causa,and
charge him with a trust, the trust will not be valid.
4. Paulus, Sentences, Book IV.
Where a trust is left to be executed by a father or a master, and the estate is
not obtained by him who has emancipated his son, or manumitted his slave, the
beneficiary of the trust can bring a praetorian action against the said son or
slave, because the profits of the estate which he has acquired remain in his
hands.
5. Ulpianus, Trusts, Book I.
Where a legacy is left to a municipality, those who are transacting its
business can be charged with a trust.
(1) Where anyone leaves a trust to be executed, not by the heir or legatee
himself, but by the heir of said heir or legatee, it is but proper that this
should be valid.
6. Paulus, Trusts, Book I.
Even if I should charge my heir with a trust as follows, "I ask you, Lucius
Titius, to charge your heir to pay ten aureito Maevius," the trust will be
valid; provided that, after the death of Titius, its execution can be demanded
from his heir. This opinion was also held by Julianus.
(1) A trust cannot, however, be created as follows, "If Stichus should become
the property of Seius, and should enter upon my estate by his order, I ask
Seius to pay such-and-such a sum," since anyone who obtains an estate through
chance, and not by the will of the testator, or acquires a legacy under such
circumstances, ought not to be burdened with the obligation of a trust; and the
principle should not be adopted that you can bind anyone by a request of this
kind when you give him nothing.
7. Ulpianus, Trusts, Book I.
Where the slave of a man who has been deported is charged with a trust, it will
belong to the Treasury, unless the party who was deported disposed of the
slave, or was restored to the enjoyment of his civil rights during the lifetime
of the testator, for then it will belong to him.
(1) Where a soldier charges a man who has been deported with a trust, the
better opinion is (and this is also approved by Marcellus), that he cannot
receive the trust.
(2) If anyone should bequeath to his creditor what he owes him, he cannot
charge him with a trust, unless the creditor obtains some benefit from the
legacy; for example, where he is apprehensive of the filing of an exception, or
where the debt was to be paid within a certain time, or under some condition.
8. Paulus, Trusts, Book I.
If a legatee, who has been charged with a trust, claims the legacy, he can only
be compelled to pay to the beneficiary of the trust as much as will be required
by the judge; or, if the judge does not compel him to
pay anything, he must assign him his right of action; for it is unjust that he
should sustain the risk attending a lawsuit, if the case should be lost through
no fault of the legatee.
(1) A slave of the heir cannot be charged with a trust, unless the latter is
requested to manumit the slave.
(2) Where a testator provided that any of his estate which might come into his
father's hands should be given to his daughter, so that, in this way, she would
have more than she would otherwise obtain from her father's estate, the Divine
Pius stated in a Rescript that it was evident that the testator intended that
the delivery of the property should be made after the death of the father.
9. Marcianus, Trusts, Book I.
Where a trust was left as follows, "To anyone who may obtain my estate under
the terms of my will, or through intestacy," or, "To anyone in whom my estate
may vest by any title whatsoever," by these terms a child who may subsequently
be born or come into the family, or anyone who may afterwards become a near
relative of the testator, is held to be charged with the trust, as well as any
woman who is not yet married, and afterwards is ascertained to be in the
position in which, according to the Edict, the property of an intestate husband
usually passes to his wife.
10. Valens, Trusts, Book II.
If I bequeath a hundred aureito you, and to the one of my three children who
may come to my funeral, the legacy will not be diminished, so far as you are
concerned, if none of the children should come.
11. Ulpianus, Trusts, Book II.
Trusts can also be left in any language, not only in Latin or Greek, but also
in Carthaginian, Gallic, or the idiom of any nation whatsoever.
(1) Whenever anyone makes a rough draft of his will, and dies before he
completes it, what is contained in the draft is not valid as a codicil,
although the document may contain words creating a trust. Maecianus states that
this was decreed by the Divine Pius.
(2) Where anyone writes, "I recommend So-and-So to you," the Divine Pius stated
in a Rescript that a trust was not created; for it is one thing to recommend a
person to his heirs, and another to intimate that it is his intention that they
should be charged with a trust for his benefit.
(3) Where a man was asked to relinquish his share of an estate upon receiving a
certain sum of money, it was held that he himself could demand the execution of
the trust by the heir. If, however, he desires to do so, can he retain in his
hands the sum bequeathed to him, and relinquish his share of the estate; or,
indeed, can he, having been tendered the sum bequeathed, be compelled against
his will to relinquish his share? He has a right to decide this matter himself.
And, indeed, where anyone is asked to relinquish his share of an estate upon
receiving a certain sum of money, a double trust is created;
first, where the party is ready to give up his share, he can demand a sum of
money; and second, even though he does not demand it, still, he can be forced
to surrender his share if the trustee is ready to pay him the said sum.
(4) Where anyone inserts the following in his will, "Such-and-such vineyards,
or lands are sufficient for you," a trust is created, since we consider as a
trust the clause, "Let him be content with such-and-such property."
(5) Where a trust is left as follows, "I wish my heir to pay ten aureito So-
and-So, unless my heir should be unwilling to do so," the trust is, to some
extent, conditional, and first requires the consent of the heir; hence, after
he has consented, he cannot change his mind and allege that he is unwilling to
pay.
(6) When a bequest is made as follows, "If he should be willing," it involves
the question as to how long the party who is charged with the trust may live.
If, however, the beneficiary should die before the trustee pays the legacy, the
heir of the latter must pay it. But if the trustee should die before he is
appointed heir, the trust will not be transmitted to his heir, for no one can
doubt that the legacy is conditional, and the trustee is held to have died
before the condition was fulfilled.
(7) Although a trust which is left in the following manner is not valid,
namely, "If he should be willing," it is, nevertheless, valid if expressed as
follows: "If you should judge it advisable; if you think it ought to be done,
if you should deem it expedient; if it seems, or should seem to you to be
advantageous;" for the will does not confer full discretion upon the heir, but
the trust is left, as it were, to the judgment of a good citizen.
(8) Hence, where a trust is left as follows, "If he should render some service
to him," it will undoubtedly be valid, if the beneficiary has been able to
render the heir any service of which a good citizen would approve. It will
likewise be valid if left as follows, "Provided that he does not offend you,"
and the heir cannot allege that the beneficiary does not deserve it, if some
other good citizen who is not prejudiced, will admit that the party is
deserving of the benefit.
(9) These words, "I ask you, my son, to take the greatest care of the real
property which is to come into your hands, in order that it may pass to your
children," although they do not exactly express the creation of a trust, as
they rather imply advice than the obligation of leaving the property to the
children; still, the devise of said land is considered to have the effect of a
trust for the benefit of the grandchildren, after the death of their father.
(10) Where a trust is left to a son who has been appointed the heir of his
father, while it was not expressly stated that it would take effect at the
death of the latter, this may be inferred; for instance, because the following
words are used, "In order that he may leave the property to his son," or, "I
wish him to have the property," or, "I wish it to belong to him," it can be
maintained that the execution of the trust is to be postponed until the son
becomes his own master.
(11) Where a trust has been left to anyone in the following terms: "If he
should become his own master at the death of his father," and he becomes
independent by emancipation, the condition will not be held to have failed, but
he will obtain the benefit of the trust at the time of his father's death, just
as if the condition had been fulfilled.
(12) Where a testator bequeathed certain property belonging to him, and
afterwards alienated it through urgent necessity, the execution of the trust
canbedemanded, unless it can be proved that the testator intended to deprive
him of the benefit of it, the fact, of his having changed his mind must,
however, be proved by the heirs.
(13) Therefore, if anyone should collect the note of a debtor which he had in
trust but did not, by enforcing payment, intend to annul the trust, it can be
said that it must be executed. There is, however, a certain difference between
these two cases; for, in one, the substance of the debt itself is extinguished,
but in the other, the property still remains, although it may have been
alienated. But I held that the claim for the execution of the trust still
existed, even though a certain party had exacted the payment of a note of the
debtor and retained possession of the money as a deposit, especially because
the creditor did not himself demand the money, but the debtor tendered it of
his own accord, and he, having done so, the former could not refuse to accept
it.
Therefore, by degrees we admit that, even if the testator had purchased
property with this money which he did not collect with the intention of
depriving the beneficiary of the bequest to which he was entitled, the demand
for the execution of the trust can still be made.
(14) Where anyone builds a house in an unlawful manner (that is to say one
which the Imperial Constitutions say should be demolished), let us see whether
a person can leave anything of which it is composed, by way of trust. I think
that he can do so; for although it is necessary for the house to be torn down,
still, there is no doubt that the terms of the Decree of the Senate offer no
obstacle to such a disposition of the property.
(15) Where an heir is requested to lend a sum of money at a specified rate of
interest, the trust is valid. Maecianus, however, thinks that he cannot be
compelled to lend it, unless he is furnished with proper security. I am more
inclined to the opinion that security should not be required.
(16) Where a commission in the army is left in trust to the slave of another,
the question arises whether the legacy is acquired by his master. I hold that
the estimated value of the legacy must be paid if the testator knew that the
party was a slave; but if he was ignorant of the fact, the master should not be
permitted to demand the execution of the trust, because if the testator had
known that the legatee was a slave, he would not have left him the bequest.
(17) It is evident from these cases, that when anything is left by way of
trust, the article itself must be delivered, and when this cannot be done, the
appraised value of the same must be paid.
(18) If anyone should leave ten aureito someone by a trust, and agree to leave
the same amount to him a second time, if he should lose
what was left to him by the will, the question arose whether the second trust
would be valid, or whether the heir should require security to protect himself,
lest he might be compelled to pay the ten aureiagain; and also if the sum
should be lost several times, whether the trustee ought to be called upon to
make it good.
The Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that no security should be required, and
that where the property had been lost, it should not be replaced more than once
by the trustee, for the heir ought not to be indefinitely burdened, and
compelled to repay the said sum of money every time it was lost, but, as the
legacy seems to be doubled by the second trust, no further liability attaches
to the heir, if the beneficiary should afterwards waste what he has received
under it.
(19) Likewise, if anyone should bequeath a certain sum of money to anyone, and
add that the said sum can easily be set off, as the beneficiary is himself a
debtor to the estate of the testator, Gaius Seius, and he refuses to accept the
estate of the said Gaius Seius, but demands the execution of the trust, Our
Emperor stated in a Rescript that such a demand was contrary to the intention
of the testator, as with reference to trusts the intention of the testator must
by all means be considered and observed.
(20) It frequently happens that what was left is intended for the benefit of
several persons; but the testator desired to honor only one of them by
mentioning him. This opinion of Marcellus is perfectly correct.
(21) Hence, it happens that, sometimes, where a testator wished to do honor to
several persons, and had them all in his mind, although there was but one
legacy, still, several are permitted to claim it, as for instance, where ten
persons stipulated for the same property, and the heir or trustee was requested
to pay them, for in this case, if it was to the interest of all of them, and
the testator had them in his mind, they all could demand the execution of the
trust.
But let us see whether each can bring an action for his share, or for the
entire amount. I think that they can bring suit according to the interest of
each one, and therefore the one who first proceeds will obtain the entire
amount, provided he gives security that he will defend the party who paid him
against all the other beneficiaries of the trust, whether they are partners or
not.
(22) Sometimes, however, the right to make a demand for the execution of a
trust, or for a legacy, will belong to another party than the one whose name is
mentioned in the will; as, for example, where the heir is charged to pay a
public tax for Titius, the farmer of the revenue must make the demand for the
execution of the trust, or for the payment of the legacy; although he may be
the person mentioned, and Titius himself can demand the legacy which was left
to him.
I think that it makes a great deal of difference whom the testator had in his
mind, and whom he intended to benefit. Generally, however, it should be
understood that he acted for the advantage of a private individual, although
the profit may have actually enured to the farmer of the revenue.
(23) Where something is left for the erection of a public work in a city, the
Divine Marcus and Lucius Verus stated in a Rescript directed to Procula that
each heir was liable for the entire amount. They, however, in this instance,
granted time to a co-heir during which he might send persons to do the work,
and after this time they decided that Procula alone would be liable, and that
she could collect from her co-heir his share of the expense which she had
incurred.
(24) The Divine Marcus also stated in a Rescript that the same rule was
applicable to a statue, a servitude, and other things which are incapable of
division.
(25) Where anyone is ordered to construct a public work, and offers to furnish
the money to the city in order that it may construct it, when the testator
intended that the trustee himself should do so, he shall not be heard; and this
the Divine Marcus stated in a Rescript.
12. Valens, Trusts, Book I.
"Let Stichus be free, and I request my heir to teach him a trade, in order that
he may be able to support himself." Pegasus says that the trust is void,
because the kind of trade was not stated. But the Praetor or the Judge must
determine, in accordance with the intention of the deceased, and the age,
position, character, and talents of the slave to whom the bequest was made,
what trade it would be best for the heir to teach him at his own expense.
13. Maecianus, Trusts, Book II.
Where a testator expressed himself as follows, "Let my heir give So-and-So
such-and-such a tract of land, and pay ten aureito Seius in addition," there is
no doubt that Seius can claim half of the land and ten aureiunder the provision
of the will.
14. Gaius, Trusts, Book I.
There is no question, where a legacy is bequeathed to a wife under the
condition that she will not marry again, and she is requested to return the
legacy if she does; that she can be compelled to do so, if she should marry a
second time.
(1) An heir who has been released from the requirement of taking an oath, will
still be obliged to pay legacies and execute trusts under a will.
(2) Where, however, a legacy has been left to someone for the purpose of
purchasing property belonging to another, in order to deliver the same to a
third party; and he is unable to purchase said property for the reason that the
owner will not sell it, or wishes to sell it at an exorbitant price, he must
pay the just value of the same to the beneficiary of the trust.
15. Maecianus, Trusts, Book II.
Where the property of a testator, which is said to be in the sea is bequeathed,
it must be delivered after it has been recovered.
16. Pomponius, Trusts, Book I.
The property left under a trust is very frequently delivered to the beneficiary
in a better condition than it was when bequeathed; as for instance, where a
field has been increased by alluvial deposit, or where an island has arisen.
17. Maecianus, Trusts, Book II.
Property which will be in existence at some future time, as an island which may
be formed in the sea or in a river, can also be bequeathed.
(1) A servitude can also legally be bequeathed to a slave who owns an adjoining
tract of land.
18. Pomponius, Trusts, Book I.
If, having executed a will according to law, I leave you a trust, and then
afterwards I make another will without observing the required formalities, by
which I do not leave you a trust, or if I do, I leave you one entirely
different from that included in the first will; it must be considered whether
it was my intention, when I made my second will, to deprive you of what was
bequeathed by the first, because trusts are annulled by the mere intention.
This, however, is difficult to establish as perhaps I may not have intended to
revoke the first will, unless the second should be valid, and now the trust in
the second will will not be valid, even though the same heirs were appointed by
both wills, and entered upon the estate under the first one.
19. Valens, Trusts, Book V.
Nerva and Atilicinus very properly held that where a legacy was bequeathed to
you, or a trust was left requiring you to perform some act, even if it was not
to the interest of the heir for this to be done, the right to bring an action
should be denied to you, if you did not furnish security to the heir to comply
with the will of the deceased.
20. Ulpianus, Trusts, Book VI.
If property should be left to me in trust, and the same property should be
bequeathed to you either as a legacy, or in trust, not with the intention of
dividing it, but entirely to each one of us, there is no doubt that if it
should be given to one alone, the other will have no right whatever in the
property, but he will be entitled to an action to recover the entire price of
the same.
21. Paulus, Sentences, Book IV.
Atrust can also be left by a mere motion of the head, provided he who does so
is also able to speak, unless some disease with which he is suddenly attacked
prevents him from using his voice.
(1) It has been established that where a trust is left, and the property to
which it relates is ascertained to belong to the party to whom it was left by
reason of a valuable consideration, the trust will be extinguished, unless the
deceased intended that the appraised value of the property should also be paid
to the owner of the same.
(2) Where the columns or timbers of a house are left under a trust, the highest
authority has decided that only such parts of the building can be delivered
which may be removed without injuring it, and that no statement of the
appraised value of the same shall be made.
22. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book IV.
Where anyone in the beginning of his will expresses himself as follows, "I wish
he to whom I have twice made the same bequest shall only be paid once," and
afterwards, by the same will or by a codicil, he knowingly bequeaths the same
property several times to the same person, his last will should be held to
prevail, for no one can say that a man is not permitted to revoke his first
will.
This, however, will only apply where he expressly states that he had changed
his original intention, and desired that the legatee should receive several
bequests.
(1) Where a soldier who has been sentenced to death for a capital crime is, by
the terms of the sentence which condemned him, permitted to make a will, he is
also authorized to leave property in trust.
(2) The beneficiary of a trust must alone sustain the loss caused by the death
of a slave left to him under the same, before the heir is in default, even
though a slave belonging to another is the subject of the legacy.
23. Paulus, Sentences, Book V.
It is dishonorable for the Emperor to claim a legacy, or the benefit of a trust
under an imperfect will; for it is becoming to the majesty of so great a ruler
to show obedience to the laws from whose operation he himself seems to be
exempt.
24. Neratius, Opinions, Book II.
A bequest can be made to a creditor in order to prevent his heir from
recovering money which is not due.
25. Paulus, On Neratius, Book I.
"Let So-and-So, my heirs, pay a hundred aureito Seius." Seius can demand
payment from whichever of said heirs he wishes.
(1) Where there is no ambiguity in the words made use of, no question as to the
intention of the testator should be raised.
26. The Same, On Neratius, Book II.
He who owes a trust is compelled not only to deliver the property from the day
when he is in default, but also to make good any loss Which the beneficiary of
the trust may suffer on this account.
27. The Same, Decrees, Book II.
Paula, having appointed Callinicus heir to a part of her estate, bequeathed by
her will ten aureito her daughter Jubentiana, and then, after some time, having
executed a codicil, she left the hundred aureito the same Callinicus, but did
not add: "In addition to his share." It
was decided that both sums should be paid to him, especially as nothing had
been left to the daughter of Callinicus by the codicil.
(1) Pompeius Hermippus appointed his son Hermippus heir to three-fourths of his
estate, and his daughter Titiana heir to the remaining fourth, and left to each
of them certain lands as preferred legacies; and he also directed that if
Hermippus should die without issue, another tract of land should be given to
his daughter. After having made his will, he made a codicil by which he left
his daughter certain lands, and desired her to be content with them, together
with what he had left her by his will. The property of Hermippus was forfeited
to the Treasury, and his sister Titiana demanded the execution of the trust.
The question arose, as her brother was requested to pay her so much instead of
her share of the estate, whether her father intended that she should only
receive what he had left her by the codicil. It seems to me that he had
absolutely revoked his first will. The more equitable interpretation seemed to
be that her father did not intend to deprive her of her share of the estate to
which she would have been entitled during the lifetime of her brother, nor of
that which the latter was to leave her at his death, if he should die without
issue; and it was so decided.
(2) Julianus Severus, having appointed several heirs at the time of his death,
left to his foster brother fifty aureiwhich he desired to be paid to him by
Julius Maurus, his tenant, out of the rent of land that he owed him; and he
also bequeathed certain property to the said Maurus. The Treasury raised a
question as to the disposal of the estate, and Maurus paid the money to the
Treasury, by order of the Imperial Steward, and the appointed heir afterwards
gained the case against the Treasury. The foster-brother having died, his heir
demanded the execution of the trust by the heir of Maurus; but the Emperor
decided that he was not charged with the trust, but that he had only been
mentioned to point out the source from which the trust could be obtained, and
therefore that the heir of Severus should execute it.
28. The Same, On the Tertullian Decree of the Senate.
If I should be charged with a trust to deliver to another person all over and
above the share that I can legally take, it is established that I can also
receive the said amount.
29. Labeo, On the Last Epitomes of Javolenus.
Where a man had a concubine, and gave her the privilege of using the clothes of
a former concubine, and then made a bequest as follows, "I leave her such-and-
such clothing which I have purchased, and intended for her," Cascellius and
Trebatius deny that she is entitled to the clothing which was obtained for the
first concubine, because a different rule prevails in the case of a wife.
Labeo does not adopt this opinion, because, while it is true that in the case
of a legacy of this kind the law governing a wife does not apply, the
interpretation of the words used by the testator must be considered.
The same rule applies to the case of a daughter, or to any other person
whatsoever. The opinion of Labeo is correct.
(1) Where a legacy was bequeathed as follows, "I desire my wife, Titia, to have
a share of my estate equal to the smallest one which any one of my heirs may
have," and the shares of the heirs were unequal, Quintus Mucius and Gallus held
that the largest share was bequeathed, for the reason that the smaller share is
included in the larger. Servius and Ofilius contended that the smallest share
was meant, because when the heir was charged with the payment of the legacy, he
had the power to give whatever share he chose. Labeo approves this opinion, and
it is correct.
(2) Where a legacy was bequeathed as follows, "Let my heir pay to Seia a sum of
money equal to that which I obtained from the estate of Titius," Labeo thinks
that the legacy includes what the testator had entered in his accounts as
having been derived from the said estate; but he denies that security should be
furnished to the heir by the legatee to protect him, in case the heir should
afterwards be required to pay anything on account of the said estate.
I, however, hold the contrary opinion, because it cannot be maintained that
what the heir will have to pay on account of said estate has actually come into
his hands. Alfenus Varus states that this was the opinion of Servius, and it is
correct.
(3) Where a slave has been left to you in general terms, and the heir delivers
Stichus to you, and he is evicted, Labeo says that you can proceed against him
under the will, because the heir is not considered to have given you any slave,
since you were unable to retain the one he gave you. I think that this is
correct. But he also says that you should notify the heir of the eviction
before instituting proceedings, for, if you did otherwise, an exception on the
ground of bad faith could be filed against you in case you brought an action
under the will.
(4) "If my slaves Stichus and Damus are in my possession at the time of my
death, let them be free, and let them have for themselves such-and-such a tract
of land." Labeo thinks that if either of said slaves should be alienated or
manumitted by their owner, after the will was executed, neither of them would
become free. Tubero, however, thinks that the one who remained in the hands of
the testator would be free, and be entitled to the legacy. I think that the
opinion of Tubero is the one more in conformity with the intention of the
deceased.
30. The Same, On the Last Epitomes of Javolenus, Book II.
A testator who had four oil jars made the following bequest: "I bequeath two
oil jars which are similar." I gave it as my opinion that only a pair of jars
was bequeathed, as the expression, "Two pairs of jars," is not the same as "Two
similar jars." Trebatius is of the same opinion.
(1) Where a testator rented certain public gardens from the State, and
bequeathed to Aufidius the produce of said gardens until the expiration of the
lease under which they were rented, and charged his heir to pay the rent of
said gardens and permit him to enjoy the same, I held that the heir was obliged
to permit him to enjoy them, and moreover, that he would also be obliged to pay
the rent of said gardens to the State.
(2) Where it was inserted into a will, "Let my heir pay five aureito Stichus,
my slave, and if Stichus should serve my heir as a slave for the term of two
years, let him be free," I think that the legacy will be due after the lapse of
two years, for both it and the grant of freedom should be referred to that
time. This was also the opinion of Trebatius.
(3) If you are charged to sell me a tract of land for a specified price, you
will not be at liberty under the terms of said sale to reserve any of the crops
of said land, because the price refers to the entire premises.
(4) Where I directed a party to purchase a tract of land for himself and me, to
be held in partnership, and he then divided said land into two portions by
boundaries, and, before delivering it to me, he devised it as follows, "I give
to So-and-So my tract of land," I denied that more than half the land was due,
because it would not be probable that the testator, when he made the devise,
intended that his heir should be charged with the mandate.
(5) "Let my heir pay two hundred aureito my wife, while she remains with my son
at Capua." The son left his mother. I was of the opinion that as long as both
parties resided at Capua, the legacy would be due to the mother, even though
they did not live together. If, however, they should move to some other town,
Trebatius says that the legacy would only be due for one year according to the
time during which they lived together. Let us see whether a condition was not
implied by the words, "While she remains with my son at Capua," but that they
shall be considered as superfluous. I do not adopt this opinion. Still, the
legacy should be paid to her, provided it is not her fault if she did not
reside with her son.
(6) If you are charged to deliver a house belonging to another, and you cannot
purchase said house on any terms whatsoever, Attius says that the court must
make an appraisement of its value, so that the heir may be discharged after the
amount has been paid.
The same rule applies if you could have bought the house and did not do so.
31. The Same, Epitomes of Probabilities, by Paulus, Book I.
Where a house is bequeathed to anyone, he will be entitled to all the buildings
situated on the land belonging to said house. Paulus: This rule, however, does
not apply where the owner possessed two adjoining houses, and a room of one of
them was destined for the use of the other, and employed for this purpose; for,
under these circumstances, the said room will cease to be accessory to the
building to which it is attached, and will become accessory to the other.
32. Scaevola, Digest, Book XIV.
A testator appointed Sextia heir to a fourth of his estate, and Seius and
Marcius, his sister's sons, heirs to the remaining three-fourths. He then
substituted Sextia for Marcius, and Marcius for Sextia, and left Marcius
certain property as a preferred legacy. Marcius rejected the share of the
estate to which he was appointed heir, and, having died intestate, his property
passed to his legitimate brother Seius. The
question arose whether Sextia could, under the substitution, also claim for
herself from the heir-at-law what had been left to Marcius as a preferred
legacy, on the ground of the substitution. The answer was that, according to
the facts stated, Sextia was not substituted, so far as the legacies which had
been bequeathed to Marcius were concerned.
33. The Same, Digest, Book XV.
Acertain man bequeathed to his wife, with other property, that portion of his
house in which they had been accustomed to live. The question arose, since, at
the time that the will was made as well as when the testator died, he made use
of the entire house, and did not rent any portion of it, whether he only
intended to bequeath the bedroom in which he was accustomed to sleep.
The answer was that all that part of the house in which he habitually resided
with his family was included.
(1) A testator, among other bequests, left the following legacy to his wife: "I
desire that whatever I have presented to my wife, or have purchased for her use
during my lifetime shall be given to her." I ask whether it should be held that
she was also entitled to what he had given to her after the will was made. The
answer was that the words mentioned had no reference to future time.
(2) Where Seius paid a hundred aureito a creditor of his wife, and redeemed a
piece of jewelry which had been deposited by way of pledge, and, having
afterwards executed a will, made the following bequest, "I give to my wife
whatever I have paid on account of a stipulation into which she entered, and,
in addition to this, two hundred aureievery year;" the question arose whether
the said two hundred aureicould be recovered by the husband's heirs from his
wife or from her heirs. The answer was if he had paid the creditor as a
donation, his heirs would be liable under the trust if they tried to collect
the debt, and that they could even be barred by an exception. The presumption
would be that a donation was intended, unless the contrary could be proved by
the heir.
34. The Same, Digest, Book XVI.
A certain woman bequeathed a claim of her debtor as follows: "I wish the ten
aurei,which the heirs of Gaius Seius owe me, to be paid to Titius, in addition;
and I desire my heir to assign to him his right of action against them, and to
deliver to the said Titius the pledges which they have given." I ask whether
the heirs should only pay the ten aurei,or whether the right of action should
be assigned for the entire debt; that is to say, for the interest as well as
the principal. The answer was that it appears that the entire obligation of the
debt was bequeathed. I also ask, if a testatrix should not be aware that her
agents in the province entered into a stipulation for the ten aurei,and the
interest should be added to the principal on account of the above-mentioned
trust, whether the increase of this debt would belong to Titius. I answered
that it would.
(1) A testator, having appointed his son his heir to a portion of his estate,
with other things left him a preferred legacy in these words:
"I request that twenty claims, taken from my account-book, shall be given
without fraudulent intent to my son Titius, after he has selected the same."
The said testator, during his lifetime, entrusted his son with the transaction
of all his business, and the son, after the will was made, and for ten years
before his father's death, during which time he acted as his agent, contrary to
the usual practice of his father as shown by his account-book, lent new debtors
large sums of money, and permitted the old debtors who owed his father small
amounts to increase their obligations, in order that the aforesaid twenty
claims might almost fill the entire account-book of his father. The question
arose whether the son was entitled, as a preferred legacy, to the loans which
he himself had made. The answer was that he could only make a choice of those
which were in the account-book of the testator at the time he executed his
will.
(2) A woman left, as a preferred legacy, to one of her heirs all that remained
of the estate of her husband Areto, and charged him to deliver said property to
her great-grandson when he reached the age of sixteen years; and she then added
the following: "I also ask that you pay, satisfy, and discharge any remaining
debt due from the estate of Areto, out of the income of the same to the
creditors of said estate." The question arose, if the heir should prove that
there was not sufficient income from the estate to pay all the claims, whether
he himself would be required to assume the burden of the indebtedness. The
answer was that it was evidently the intention of the testatrix that the debts
should be paid out of the income of the property, and not out of the private
estate of the heir.
(3) A father, having appointed his son and his daughter his heirs, and left to
each one of them certain lands and book-accounts by way of preferred legacies,
inserted the following provision into his will: "I charge you, my dear son, and
I wish you to pay all the legacies which I have bequeathed, and if I should
contract any indebtedness by a temporary loan, and owe this when I die, I
desire that you pay it, so that what I have left to your sister may remain
intact." The question arose whether the son was required to pay all the debts
of his father, no matter how they were contracted. The answer was that the
daughter could, under the terms of the trust, demand to be released from
liability, in order that what the testator had left her might come into her
hands unencumbered.
35. The Same, Digest, Book XVII.
A patron asked his heir to immediately purchase a place in a tribe for his
freedman. The latter suffered from the default of the heir of the patron for a
long time, and, at his death, appointed a man of the most illustrious rank his
heir. The question arose whether the appraised value of the place in the tribe
was due to the heir of the freedman ? The reply was that it was due.
It was also asked whether, in this instance, the ordinary benefits and
advantages to which the freedman would have been entitled by his membership in
the said tribe until the day of his death could be recov-
ered, if the place in the tribe had been purchased in the beginning, in
accordance with the will of the patron; or whether his heir would only be
entitled to the interest on the appraised value of the place. I answered that
whatever the freedman could himself have recovered was transmitted to his heir.
(1) A testator made a devise to Sempronius as follows: "Let Sempronius take all
the lands which I have within the boundaries of Galatia, as far as the tract
which is called Gaas, and which are in charge of Primus, the steward, together
with all the appurtenances of the same." The question arose, as there was but
one tract of land in charge of the said steward, and it was not within the
boundaries of Galatia, but within those of Cappadocia, whether this tract would
belong to Sempronius, along with the others. The answer was that it would
belong to him.
(2) A testator made the following devise to his freedman, whom he mentioned by
name, "I desire the Trebatian Estate, which is in the Atellatan district, and
also the Satrian Estate, which is in the district of Niphana, together with a
shop, to be given." The question arose, as among the lands above devised there
was a tract designated as Satrian, but which was not in the district of
Niphana, whether it should be delivered to the freedman under the terms of the
trust? The answer was if there was no estate called Satrian in the district of
Niphana, but if it was certain that the testator had in his mind the one which
was situated elsewhere, it would, none the less, be due, because he had made a
mistake in indicating the district in which it was situated.
(3) A person made the following provision in a codicil, which he confirmed:
"Let the Julian bath, which is joined to my house, be granted for the
gratuitous use of the citizens of Tibur and Scitis, to whom I am much attached,
in such a way that they can bathe there publicly, at the expense, and under the
supervision of my heirs, for six months of every year." The question arose
whether the heirs would be required to pay the expense of necessary repairs.
The answer was that, in accordance with the facts stated, the testator, in
addition to the obligation to heat the bath, and provide for service, also
included whatever was connected to its daily maintenance, so that the bath
might be provided with everything necessary; and that, during the ordinary
periods of intermission, it should be prepared and cleaned, so that it might be
proper for occupancy, as is usual under some circumstances.
36. Notes of Claudius on Scaevola, Digest, Book XVIII.
Where a will has been decided to be inofficious, the trusts therein contained
are not due ab intestatobecause, as an insane person cannot make a will, it is
held that nothing included in his last will is valid.
37. Scaevola, Digest, Book XVIII.
A certain person, at the time of his death, devised to his mother, Seia, a
certain tract of land which already belonged to her, and requested her when she
died to transfer the same to his wife Flavia Albina. After the death of the
testator, the mother stated in the presence of a magistrate that she did not
wish to do anything against the
wish of her son, and that she was willing to transfer the land to Flavia
Albina, if she would pay her two aureia year, as income. She, however, neither
delivered possession of the property, nor received the sum of two aureia year.
The question arose whether she could legally sell the land to a third party.
The answer was that, if the inquiry was made with reference to the legacy and
the trust, in accordance with the facts stated, what the testator left to his
mother was not valid, and there was no obligation to comply with the trust,
provided the mother had not received anything else by the will.
(1) A certain person appointed an heir, and left two hundred aureito Maevius,
charging him to pay a hundred to Glaucetyches and fifty to Elpidus. Afterwards
Maevius, with the consent of the testator, sent letters to the two legatees, and
paid them their legacies in accordance with the will of the testator. The
testator afterwards made a codicil, and provided that if any instrument was
produced which was contrary to the said codicil, it should not be valid. The
question arose whether Maevius, who had received two hundred aurei,could be sued
by the legatees under the trust, because the testator had changed his mind with
reference to the letters above mentioned. The answer was that, according to the
facts stated, an action could not be brought against Maevius, whether he had
received the two hundred aurei,or the land instead of them.
(2) A testator appointed Seia and Maevius, his freedmen, heirs to equal portions
of his estate, and substituted his ward Sempronius for Maevius. He then
confirmed a codicil by which he provided as follows: "Lucius Titius to Seia,
his heir, whom he appointed to inherit half of his estate, Greeting. I forbid
Maevius, my freedman, whom I have appointed by my will heir to half of my
estate, to receive the same; and, in his place, I desire Publius Sempronius, my
ward, to be my heir to his share of my estate." He also left to Maevius, whom he
did not wish to obtain a share of his estate, a trust with the following
censure: "I wish a hundred and fifty bottles of old wine to be given to Maevius,
my freedman, who deserves nothing from me."
As it was the intention of the testator, in the first place, that half of his
estate should, under all circumstances, belong to Sempronius, the question
arose whether the trust expressed in the above-mentioned words should be
considered valid, and of whom Sempronius could make the demand, as the codicil
was addressed to a certain person. The answer was that the execution of the
trust could be demanded of Maevius.
(3) A father gave to his emancipated son all his property with the exception of
two slaves, but did not make a donation mortis causa,and stipulated with his
son as follows: "Do you promise that the slaves which I have given you and the
lands which I have transferred to you as a gift, together with such offspring
as may be born to said slaves, and also the implements used for cultivating the
soil, or whatever of said property may remain or be under your control, and
which has not been fraudulently disposed of by you, shall at your death be
returned to me, if I should be living, or delivered to anyone whom I may
designate? I, Lucius Titius, the father, have stipulated this and, I, Lucius
Titius, the son, have promised it." The father, when dying, wrote to his son
creating a trust as follows: "Lucius Titius, to his son Lucius Titius,
Greeting. Confident of your filial affection, I charge you to pay to So-and-So
and So-and-So, a certain sum of money, and I desire my slave Lucrio to be
free." The question arose whether the son, who could neither obtain praetorian
possession of his father's estate nor was appointed his heir, was bound to
execute the trust, and grant freedom to the slave by the terms of the letter.
The answer was that while the son could not enter upon the estate of his
father, nor demand praetorian possession of the same, and although he did not
hold anything belonging to his estate, an action could, nevertheless, be
brought against him as a debtor by the heirs of his father, on the ground of
the stipulation; and also one on account of the trust by those who were
interested in its execution; especially after the Constitution of the Divine
Pius, which provided for a case of this kind.
(4) A widow, about to be married, directed her two children, whom she had by
her first husband, to stipulate for twenty aurei,the value of the dowry which
he was about to give, if for any reason her marriage could be dissolved, so
that her entire dowry could be paid to one or the other of them. One of the
children having died during the marriage, the wife, by a letter, directed the
survivor to be content with half of the dowry, without demanding any more of
it, and to let the remaining half remain in possession of her husband.
The woman having afterwards died, the question arose whether her husband could
be sued for the entire dowry by her son, and whether the former could be
protected by an exception on the ground of bad faith; and moreover whether an
action would lie in his favor, under the terms of the trust, in order that the
son might be compelled to release him from his share of the obligation. The
answer was that the exception could legally be interposed, and that he could
also bring suit under the terms of the trust.
It was also asked whether a praetorian action, having reference to the remaining
half of the property, would lie in favor of the heirs of the woman against her
son. The answer was that, according to the facts stated, and especially after
the letter written to the son, the action could not be brought. Claudius: Since
she stated in her letter that her son should be content with half the dowry, it
was held that by these words a trust for the benefit of the son was created.
(5) A testator made the following provision in a codicil: "I wish everything
included herein to be carried out. I give to my lord, Maximus, five thousand
denariiwhich I received by way of deposit from his uncle Julius Maximus, to be
paid to him with interest when he becomes a man, which will amount to thirty
thousand denarii,for I have promised his uncle under oath to do this." The
question arose whether the terms of the codicil were sufficient to authorize a
suit to recover the money deposited, as their truth could not be established by
any other evidence. I answered that, in accordance with the facts stated, what
the testator wrote should be believed, as he alleged that he had bound himself
by an oath to do this.
(6) Titia, a woman of high rank, who had always employed Callimacus to transact
her business (the latter being incapable of taking under a will), having drawn
up a will in her own hand, provided as follows: "I, Titia, have made this my
will, and I desire that the sum of ten thousand denariibe given to Callimacus,
by way of reward." I ask whether this money can be claimed by the heirs of
Titia, on the ground of its being a recompense. I answered that what is
bequeathed in violation of law can not be collected.
(7) With reference to the following words of a will: "I wish payment to be made
to all male and female slaves whom I have manumitted, or may manumit, either by
this will, or by any other, together with their sons and daughters," the
question arose whether the heir was liable to those whom the testator had
manumitted during his lifetime. The answer was that the provisions of the trust
must also be executed so far that those who had been manumitted before the will
was made, and their children of both sexes, were concerned.
38. The Same, Digest, Book XIX.
A father forbade his son, who was also his heir, to alienate the lands
belonging to the estate, or to subject them to pledge; but charged him to hold
them for the benefit of such children as he might have by legal marriage, and
of his other relatives. The son, having paid one creditor of the estate,
released certain tracts of land which his father had encumbered, and, in order
to obtain the money to pay him, transferred the said lands to a second
creditor, by way of pledge or hypothecation. The question arose whether the
pledge was legally contracted. The answer was that, according to the facts
stated, it was legally contracted. The question was also raised, if the son
should sell land forming part of the estate in order to satisfy its creditors,
whether the purchasers, who were ignorant of the existence of a trust, could
legally buy the land. I answered that, according to the facts stated, the sale
would be valid if there was no other property belonging to the estate out of
which the debt could be paid.
(1) A certain man having appointed his two freedmen, Stichus and Eros, his
heirs, provided as follows in his will, "I do not consent that the Cornelian
Estate shall leave the hands of freedmen." Stichus directed his female slave
Arescusa to be free by his will, and bequeathed to her his share of said
estate. I ask whether Eros, and the other fellow-freedmen of Stichus, can
demand from the heir of the latter his share of the said estate, under the
terms of the trust. The answer was that Arescusa was not included in the trust.
(2) A man appointed his daughter his heir, and inserted into his will, "I do
not desire my house to pass out of the hands of my freedmen, but I wish it to
belong to the slaves born in my family, whom I have mentioned in this will."
The question arose, after the death of the heir and the slaves born in the
household of the testator, whether a single freedman who remained was entitled
to the entire benefit of the trust. The answer was that, in accordance with the
facts stated, only the proportionate share of the surviving freedman would
belong to him.
(3) A testator, having left a tract of land to his son, forbade him to sell,
give, or pledge the same, as long as he lived, and added the following clause:
"If he should do this contrary to my will, I desire that the Titian Estate
shall belong to the Treasury, and this is provided in order that the said
Titian Estate may always be held in his name." As the son retained the property
in compliance with the will of his father during his entire lifetime, the
question arose whether, after his death, the land would belong to the members
of the family, and not to the heirs appointed by the son. The answer was that
it may be inferred from the will of the deceased that the son, as long as he
lived, could neither alienate nor pledge the land, but that he would have a
right to make a will, and leave it even to foreign heirs.
(4) Julianus Agrippa, a member of the First Company of the Triarii, inserted
the following into his will: "I do not wish my heir to pledge or alienate, in
any way whatsoever, the remainder of such-and-such lands, or my suburban
estate, or my house in the city." His daughter, whom he had appointed his heir,
left a daughter the grandchild of the testator, who, having held the property
for a long time, died after appointing foreign heirs. The question arose
whether the foreign heirs would be entitled to the said land, or whether it
would belong to Julia, who was a grand-niece of Julius Agrippa. I answered
that, as the above provision was only a mere precept, nothing had been done
against the will of the deceased, which would prevent the title to the land
from vesting in the heirs.
(5) A certain testatrix left a small tract of land, together with a shop, to
fifteen of her freedmen, whom she mentioned by name, and added the following:
"I wish my freedmen to hold this land under the condition that none of them
will sell or give away his share, or do anything else which will cause it to
become the property of a stranger. If anything is done, contrary to this
provision, I desire their shares, together with the land with the shop, to
belong to the people of Tusculum." Some of her freedmen sold their shares to
two of their fellow-freedmen, who were included in their number, and the
purchasers having died, appointed as their heir Gaius Seius, a stranger. The
question arose whether the shares which were sold would belong to Gaius Seius,
or to their surviving fellow-freedmen who had not disposed of theirs. The
answer was that, according to the facts stated, they belonged to Gaius Seius.
It was also asked whether the shares which were sold would belong to the people
of Tusculum. I answered that they would not. Claudius: Because the person of
the actual possessor, who is a stranger, is not to be considered but those of
the purchasers, who, in accordance with the will of the deceased, were of the
number of those to whom she had permitted the property to be sold, the
condition under which the land was granted to the people of Tusculum by the
terms of the trust has not been fulfilled.
(6) A testator charged a legatee to whom he had bequeathed two thousand
solidiunder a trust, as follows: "I ask you, Petronius, to pay the said sum of
two thousand solidito the society of a certain temple."
The society having been subsequently dissolved, the question arose whether the
legacy should belong to Petronius, or should remain in possession of the heir.
The answer was that Petronius could legally demand it, especially if it did not
devolve upon him to execute the will of the deceased.
(7) A mother appointed her sons her heirs, and added: "They must, under no
circumstances whatever, dispose of the lands which will come into their
possession as part of my estate, but they must reserve them for their
successors, and furnish security to one another with reference to this." The
question arose whether the lands should be considered to have been left in
trust by these words. The answer was that, in accordance with what was stated,
they did not create a trust.
(8) A man having appointed an heir to half his estate, left him a certain tract
of land as a preferred legacy, and added the following: "I ask you to consent
to receive Clodius Verus, my grandson, and your relative as your co-heir to the
Julian Estate which I have ordered to be given to you as a preferred legacy."
The question arose whether the grandson was entitled to half of the land under
the terms of the trust. I answered that he was.
39. The Same, Digest, Book XX.
"I wish a hundred aureito be given to my freedman, Pamphilus, in addition to
what I have left him by my codicil. Pamphilus, I know that all that I leave you
will eventually come into the hands of my children, for I bear in mind the
affection which you entertain towards them." I ask whether the testator, by the
use of the above-mentioned words, charged Pamphilus with the trust to pay to
the children of the deceased a hundred aureiafter his death? The answer was
that, according to the facts stated, it could not be held, so far as the
language of the testator was concerned, that Pamphilus was charged with a trust
to pay the hundred aurei;but as it would be extremely dishonorable for the good
opinion of the deceased to be contradicted by his freedman, the hundred
aureiwhich had been bequeathed to him must be paid to the children of the
testator.
The Divine Marcus, Our Emperor, rendered the same decision in a similar case.
(1) The following question was proposed for determination. A certain individual
who had no children or relatives, and was reduced to extremity by disease,
having called his friends together, told them in the presence of Gaius Seius,
who occupied the same house with him, that he desired to leave him certain
lands which he mentioned; and Gaius Seius drew up this statement, which was
witnessed, and the testator himself, having been interrogated, as to whether he
had made it, answered "most assuredly," which was inserted into the instrument.
The question arose whether the lands which were designated would belong to
Gaius Seius under the terms of the trust. The answer was that there could be no
doubt whatever on this point, as the trust was valid.
(2) A father appointed his two daughters heirs to equal shares of his estate,
and left a tract of land to one of them as a preferred legacy,
and requested the other to pay her sister twenty aurei,and he also requested
this same daughter to transfer to her said sister her half of the land. The
question arose whether she was obliged to pay the twenty aurei,or not. I
answered that she was not obliged to do so.
40. The Same, Digest, Book XXI.
A daughter, born after the emancipation of her father, requested her paternal
uncle, as her heir-at-law, to give her share of the estate, and two tracts of
land, in addition, to her maternal uncle. The succession of the said daughter
passed equally to both of her uncles, as next of kin, through praetorian
possession.
As the trust was not valid with reference to that part of the estate to which
her maternal uncle would be entitled as heir-at-law through praetorian
possession, the question arose, whether it, nevertheless, would not be valid,
as far as half of the said tract was concerned; so that the said Titius, her
uncle, might have two shares of said tracts, that is to say, one of them
through his right under Praetorian Law, and the other which he could claim by
virtue of the trust. The answer was that he was entitled to make the claim.
The question was also asked, if the deceased daughter had also charged her
paternal uncle with trusts for the benefit of others, whether he would be
obliged to execute them altogether, or only in proportion to his share of the
estate. The answer was that he would be obliged to execute them in their
entirety.
(1) A testator appointed Seia his heir to three-fourths of his estate, and
Maevius his heir to one-fourth, and he charged Seia with a trust as follows: "I
ask, and I charge you to deliver to your son everything that you obtained from
my estate after reserving my gardens for yourself." Since he had charged her
with a trust in general terms, the question arose whether anyone who would
become his heir would be compelled to pay whatever legacies he had bequeathed,
and execute whatever trusts he had created; or whether, if Seia should
surrender three-fourths of the estate, she could claim all the gardens. The
answer was that it appeared that the co-heir was charged by the trust to
deliver to Seia the fourth interest which he had in said gardens.
41. The Same, Digest, Book XXII.
A husband appointed his wife and a son whom he had by her, his heirs, and
charged his wife with a trust as follows: "I ask you, my wife, not to claim any
share in the Titian Estate, as you know that I myself bought all of said
property, but on account of the affection and respect which I owe you, I have
let it be understood that we had equal shares in this purchase which I made
with my own money." The question arose whether he intended the said land to
belong entirely to his son. The answer, with reference to the clause in
question, was that the testator intended the said land to be included in his
estate, as constituting a portion of all of it, so that his wife and son should
each be entitled to half of the land as constituting part of the same.
(1) Where the following provision was inserted in a will, "I wish my house,
with the garden adjoining it, to be given to my freedmen," and under another
head was written, "I wish my heir to transfer to my freedman Fortunius, in the
house which I have given to my freedmen, the room in which I was accustomed to
live, and the storeroom connected with the same," the question arose whether
the heir of the testator was obliged to pay the legacy to Fortunius, although
the entire house had been previously devised to all the freedmen. The answer
was that he was not required to do so.
(2) A testator made the following provision in a codicil, which he confirmed by
his will: "I bequeath to all my freedmen, including those whom I have
manumitted during my lifetime, who are manumitted by this codicil, or whom I
may hereafter manumit, and their wives, sons and daughters, except such as I
have specifically bequeathed, to my wife by the terms of my will." He
afterwards charged his heirs as follows: "I desire my heirs to give to my wife,
their co-heir, my lands in Umbria, Etruria, and Picenum, together with all
their appurtenances, including the country or city slaves, and those who
transact my business, with the exception of such as have been manumitted." The
question arose whether Eros and Stichus, his slaves who had transacted the
business of the testator in Umbria and Picenum until the death of the latter,
and who were the natural sons of Damas whom the testator had manumitted during
his lifetime, should be delivered by the heirs to Damas, in compliance with the
terms of the codicil, or whether they belonged to Seia, his wife, according to
the terms of his letter. The answer was that, under the codicil, they belonged
to their natural father, in conformity with the dictates of natural affection.
(3) A testatrix left to Felicissimus and Felicissima, to whom she had granted
freedom, the Gargilian Estate, including the house, and, in another part of her
will, she bequeathed to her son Titius, whom she appointed heir to a fourth of
her estate, a legacy, as follows: "My son, Titius, in addition to your share of
my estate, take the legacies which your father, Praesens, and Caelius Justus,
your father's brother, left me." The question arose, as the Gargilian Estate
had been devised to the testatrix by her husband, that is to say, by the father
of her son Titius to whom the land was due under the terms of the trust,
whether the said land should belong only to Titius, the son, or to Felicissima,
or to all three of them. The answer was that it was not probable that the
testatrix, who left nothing to Felicissimus and Felicissima except what was
contained in a special bequest, intended that the legacy should, by a general
statement, be transferred to her son to whom she had also left a portion of her
estate.
(4) A man left certain slaves, who were children, by will as follows : "I wish
five of my young slaves to be given by my heirs to my little lord Publius
Maevius, the said slaves to be under the age of seven years." The testator died
many years after he executed the will. The question arose of what age the
slaves that were due to Maevius should be, whether they were those who, at the
time when the will was made, were under seven, or whether those should be given
who were ascer-
tained to be under that age at the time of the death of the testator. The
answer was that those seemed to be designated who were of that age when they
were bequeathed by the testator.
(5) A testator made a bequest to his concubine of the following legacy, among
other things: "I wish the tract of land which I have on the Appian Way to be
given to her, with the steward in charge of the same, and his wife and his
children." The question arose whether the testator intended that the
grandchildren of the steward and his wife should belong to the concubine. The
answer was that there was nothing in the case stated which would prevent them
being given to her.
(6) A certain man left a legacy in trust to Maevius as follows: "I bequeath
whatever I possess in the city of Gades." The question arose whether, if he had
any property in the suburb adjoining the city, this also would be due to Maevius
under the terms of the trust. The answer was that the meaning of the words will
also permit this extension. It was also asked, in the same case, certain notes
having been found in the account-book of the testator, he being in the habit of
loaning money in his native city of Gades, or in the environs thereof, and
having left the property which he had in said city, whether Maevius would be
entitled to the said notes on account of a trust having been created by the
words above mentioned. I answered that he would not be entitled to them.
The question also arose whether money found in a chest in his house at Gades,
or which had been obtained by the collection of different notes and deposited
there, would be due under the terms of the trust. The reply was that this
question had already been answered.
(7) A testator, by his will, in which he appointed his wife and his son his
heirs, left a hundred aureito his daughter in trust, to be paid when she
married in the family, and he added the following provision: "I charge you, my
daughter, when you marry in the family, and as often as you may marry, to
permit your brother, and your mother Seia, each to stipulate for the return of
half of the dowry which will be bestowed, if you should die during your
marriage without leaving either a son or a daughter, or a divorce should take
place before your dowry is returned, or satisfaction is otherwise given you
with reference to it."
The father gave his daughter, who was a virgin, in marriage, and presented her
with a dowry. A divorce having taken place, he received the dowry, and gave her
with it in marriage to another man, stipulating that the said dowry should be
returned either to himself or to his daughter. The testator died during her
second marriage, leaving the same will, and his son and wife became his heirs.
The husband of the girl having subsequently died, she obtained her dowry, and
married a third time in the presence, and with the consent of her brother and
mother, who even increased her dowry, and neither of them made any stipulation
with reference to it. The son and the daughter afterwards became the heirs of
their mother, and then the daughter died, leaving her husband her heir. The
question arose, as the girl had not received the money composing her dowry as a
legacy from the heirs of her father, but, being the mother of a family, had
recovered it after the death of her second husband, whether her heir could be
held liable to
the brother of the deceased, under the terms of the trust, for the money which
he could have received if he had made a stipulation with reference to the
dowry. The answer was that, according to the case stated, he would not be
liable.
(8) Where the heir or legatee of a testator is requested to adopt someone, and
the following words are added, "If he should do otherwise, let him be
disinherited," or, "Let him lose his legacy," the question arose, if he should
not adopt the person mentioned, whether an action would lie by virtue of the
trust in favor of the person who was not adopted. The answer was that a trust
by which a party is requested to adopt anyone is not valid.
(9) "I wish the tract of land which is situated in such-and-such a district to
be transferred to Maevius, Publius, and Gaius for a price fixed by an arbiter,
and, the purchase-money having been added to my estate, that my remaining heirs
shall promise, under the penalty of a hundred aurei,to be liable for double the
amount in case of eviction, in order that the said land may not either wholly,
or in part, ever pass into the hands of Seia, or her descendants, in any way
whatsoever." The question arose whether the legacy was valid, because Publius
wished to purchase it, and Gaius refused to consent. The answer was that he who
wished to profit by the trust could claim half of the land which was devised,
even though the other declined to avail himself of his right.
Inquiry was also made as to what security ought to be furnished, in accordance
with the will of the testator, for the amount to be paid to each of the heirs.
The answer was that security should be given in proportion to the share to
which they were entitled under the terms of the trust.
(10) A testator bequeathed to his sister certain slaves whom he designated in
his will, and charged her to deliver the same slaves to his children when she
died. The question arose whether the children born of said slaves should be
delivered to the children who were the heirs of the deceased, after the death
of the legatee, or whether they would belong to her heirs. The answer was that
those which were born afterwards were not included in the terms of the trust.
(11) A father owed his daughter a certain sum of money under a trust created by
the will of her husband, and, when the girl married again, her father gave a
dowry to her husband without having been directed to do so by her, and
stipulated for the return of the dowry to himself, if his daughter should die
without issue. The woman had a daughter, and the question arose whether the
father could be required to execute the trust. The answer was that if the
daughter had not ratified the dowry which was given her, the right to demand
the execution of the trust would survive.
Inquiry was also made, if the father should be willing to release the
obligation arising out of the stipulation, whether the right to demand the
execution of the trust would be denied to the woman. I replied that this had
already been answered, and if the father had given the dowry in order that the
woman might sanction it, and she did not do so, he could bring suit to recover
the dowry in question.
(12) A woman appointed her husband Seius, her heir, and substituted her foster-
child, Apia, for him; and charged her heir to transfer her estate to her said
foster-child after his death, and if anything should happen to her foster-child
before that time, she directed him to deliver her said estate to Valerian, her
nephew. The question arose, if Seius, during his lifetime, should deliver to
the foster-child whatever he had obtained from the estate, whether he would be
held to have done this in accordance with the will of the deceased; especially
when the said foster-child had been substituted for him. The answer was that,
if Apia should die during the lifetime of Seius, the latter would not be
released from the execution of the trust which had been left for the benefit of
Valerian.
(13) Scaevola held that when an appointed heir is asked to deliver an estate to
another person, when he wishes to do so, he will not be compelled, in the
meantime, to execute the trust. Claudius: For a trust of this kind is
considered to have been created after his death.
(14) A testator requested his appointed heir to deliver his entire estate to
his wife, Seia, and charged her as follows: "I ask you, Seia, to deliver to
Maevia, our dear child, everything which may come into your hands from my
estate, except what I have bequeathed to you as above mentioned; and I forbid
any security to be taken from Seia, as I know that she will rather increase,
than diminish my estate." The question arose whether Maevia could immediately
demand the execution of the trust by Seia. The answer was that there was
nothing in the case stated which would prevent her from doing so.
42. The Same, Digest, Book XXXIII.
Titius appointed his wife, Seia, his heir to a twelfth part of his estate, and
Maevius his heir to the remainder, and made the following provision with
reference to a monument which he wished to be erected for himself: "I desire my
body to be delivered to my wife to be buried in such-and-such a place, and a
monument of the value of four hundred aureito be erected." The wife obtained as
the twelfth part of the estate not more than a hundred and fifty aurei,and I
ask whether the testator, by this provision, intended that his monument should
be erected by her alone. I answered that the monument should be erected by both
the heirs, in proportion to their respective shares of the estate.
43. Celsus, Digest, Book XV.
Where a father ordered a dowry to be given to his daughter, to be fixed by the
judgment of her guardian, Tubero says that this should be considered just as if
the dowry had been bequeathed to her to the amount which would be approved of
by a reputable citizen. Labeo asks in what way a dowry can be fixed for a girl
in accordance with the judgment of a good citizen. He says that this is not
difficult when the rank, the means, and the number of children of the party who
made the will are taken into account.
44. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book II.
Where a tract of land with everything upon it is devised, any property that is
there only temporarily is not held to have been left, and therefore money which
is there for the purpose of being loaned is not included in the legacy.
45. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXII.
A legacy expressed in the following words, "Which I have procured for the use
of my wife," is a general one, and includes clothing as well as silver and gold
plate, ornaments, and all the other things which are obtained for the benefit
of the wife. But what articles should be considered to have been obtained for
this purpose? Sabinus, in his work on Vitellius, says upon this point, that
whatever terms are most frequently employed in making bequests to wives should
be understood as designating whatever is intended for her individual use, and
is , more frequently acquired for this purpose than for the common and
promiscuous use of both parties. Nor does it appear to make any difference
whether the head of the household obtained such articles before his marriage,
or afterwards; or even if he should give anything to his wife which he himself
had been accustomed to use, and then devoted it to her special use.
46. Paulus, On Vitellius, Book II.
The addition of the clause above mentioned sometimes diminishes, and sometimes
increases the legacy; it increases it when it is written as follows, "And
whatever has been acquired on her account," for this signifies that something
else has been acquired for her benefit in addition to what has already been
mentioned. It is diminished when the conjunction "and" is omitted, because,
then it signifies that those things alone of all the articles previously
designated have been procured for her benefit.
47. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXII.
If the husband purchased some of these articles before he married his wife, and
gave them to her for her use, it is the same as if he had obtained them with
this intention afterwards. In a legacy of this kind, those articles belong to
the wife which have been purchased, repaired, and retained for that purpose,
and among them are included whatever belonged to a former wife, or the
daughter, or granddaughter of the testator.
(1) The question arises as to what difference exists between the terms
"purchased" and "prepared." The answer is that the term "prepared" is included
in the term "purchased," but this is not the case with the term "prepared;"
just as if anyone had purchased an article for the use of his first wife, and
gave it to his second, for while the said article was prepared for his second
wife, it was not purchased for her.
Hence, even though a husband might not have purchased anything for his second
wife, still, by giving her the articles which the first
one had they are prepared for her use, and if they had not been transferred to
her, they would be included in the legacy; but whatever was prepared for the
use of the first wife will only belong to the second where they have been
designated for her use, because where the husband obtained them for his first
wife, he is not held to have done so with a second wife in view.
48. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IV.
For no article is included in the legacy if, when it has been given to the
wife, she is afterwards deprived of it by her husband.
49. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXII.
Slaves are also included in a legacy of this kind, for instance litter-bearers,
who usually carried the mother of the family alone, and also beasts of burden,
sedan chairs, and mules, as well as other slaves, such as girls and women
employed as hair dressers.
(1) If the husband should have given his wife any ornaments worn by men, they
will be considered as having been acquired for her use.
(2) Hence, if there were any articles used by both husband and wife, and he was
accustomed to borrow them from her, as it were, it must be said they also
should be considered as acquired for her use.
(3) There is likewise a difference between articles which have been prepared
for her use and such as were purchased for her, when such articles are
bequeathed; for where they are prepared for her use, all that have been
intended for her are included, but where they have been purchased, those alone
are included which the husband bought for that special purpose; therefore where
only the articles which have been purchased are bequeathed, those which were
obtained in any other way by the husband, and which he destined for her, are
not included. Still, whatever the husband directed to be purchased or which he
himself actually bought and did not yet give to his wife, but intended to give
to her if she had lived, will be embraced in the legacy under both these terms.
(4) Where anyone bequeaths a legacy to his wife or his concubine, composed of
articles which had been purchased and prepared for her use, no distinction is
made; for, in fact, no difference exists between the two women except that of
social rank.
(5) Where gold obtained for her use is bequeathed by a husband to his wife, and
it afterwards is melted, but the material still remains, she will be entitled
to it.
(6) But, in order for the legacy to be valid, Proculus says that the woman must
be the wife of the testator at the time of his death. This is true, for a
separation will extinguish the legacy.
(7) The bequest of articles acquired for his or her use can also be left to a
son or a daughter, as well as to a male or female slave; and there will be
included therein any property which may have been given to them, or intended
for them.
50. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XXIII.
Where a son under paternal control bequeaths a legacy, "When he will be his own
guardian," the age of puberty is meant. And, in fact, if a legacy is bequeathed
to a son under paternal control who has not reached the age of puberty, the
opinion of Sabinus and the one generally adopted is that this means not when he
becomes the head of a household, but when he arrives at the age of puberty.
However, if a mother, who is suspicious of the life which her husband is
leading, and from whom she has been divorced, should bequeath a legacy to her
son, even though he may not have reached the age of puberty; she is understood
to have had in view not the time when he shall have reached that age, but the
time when he shall both have reached that age, and have become the head of a
household. For if he should arrive at puberty afterwards, we can say much more
decisively that she had in mind the time when he should become the head of a
household, than if she had said: "When he will be his own guardian, and has
control over himself."
(1) If anyone should bequeath a legacy to the head of a household, who has not
yet reached the age of puberty, "When he shall be his own guardian," he is
considered to have had in mind the age of puberty. Sometimes this has reference
to the age of twenty-five years, where the intention of the testator is
apparent. If, however, he should make a bequest to a person who is over the age
of puberty, but under twenty-five, there is no doubt that he had in mind the
age of twenty-five.
(2) Likewise, if a bequest is made to a lunatic, a spendthrift, or a person for
whom the Praetor has appointed a guardian, for some reason or other, I think
that the testator should be considered to have had in view the time when the
party in question would be released from curatorship or guardianship.
(3) From these instances and others of the same kind, it becomes evident that
Sabinus was of the opinion that the intention of the testator was the principal
point involved. And, in order that there may be no doubt where a legacy has
been left to a child under the age of puberty, and especially where one has
been left to a person over twenty-five years of age, the testator must be
understood to have meant when the legatee should have control of himself.
(4) Moreover, this clause is susceptible of various interpretations, and
depends upon the intention of the testator, just as the following one, where he
says, "When he becomes his own master." For sometimes it is understood in one
way and sometimes another, as frequently it means the freedom of the legatee
from control, and then again it has reference to the age of puberty, or his
twenty-fifth year.
(5) For my part, however, I think that, if anyone should make a bequest to an
individual who has attained the age of puberty but is still under the age of
twenty-five years, as follows, "When he shall reach the age of puberty," the
testator had in his mind the age when he would not be entitled to complete
restitution.
(6) Likewise, where anyone makes a bequest to a person, "When he shall become
of age," or, "Of lawful age," the intention of the testa-
tor must be ascertained as to whether he meant the age of puberty or that of
twenty-five years; just as if he had written, "When he arrives at lawful age,"
or "At mature age" or "When he grows up."
51. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IV.
Where a bequest is made to a daughter under paternal control, "When she becomes
her own guardian," it will be due when she is marriageable.
52. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXIV.
Under the designation of "books" all volumes are included, whether they are
made of papyrus, parchment, or any other material whatsoever; even if they are
written on bark (as is sometimes done), or upon any kind of prepared skins,
they come under the same appellation.
If, however, the books are bound in leather, or papyrus, or ivory, or any other
substance, or are composed of wax tablets, will they be considered to be due?
Gaius Cassius says that where books are bequeathed, the bindings are also
included. Hence, it follows that everything relating to them will be due if the
intention of the testator was not otherwise.
(1) Where a hundred books are bequeathed, we must deliver to the legatee a
hundred volumes, and not the hundred parts of volumes which anyone may select
as he wishes, and each of which will be sufficient to include the contents of a
book; hence, when the works of Homer are all contained in one volume, we do not
count them as forty-eight books, but the entire volume of Homer should be
understood to mean one book.
(2) Where the works of Homer are left, and they are not complete, as many parts
of the same as can be obtained at present will be due.
(3) Sabinus says that libraries are not included in legacies of books. Cassius
adopts the same opinion, but he holds that parchment covers that are written
upon are included. He adds, afterwards, that neither book-cases, writing desks,
nor other furniture in which books are kept constitute part of the legacy.
(4) What Cassius stated with reference to blank parchments is true, for blank
sheets of papyrus are not included in the term, "Books bequeathed," and books
are not due under the term, "Sheets of papyrus bequeathed," unless, perhaps, in
this case the intention of the testator may influence us; as for example, if
one literary man should leave to another sheets of paper as follows, "I
bequeath all my sheets of paper," and he had nothing else but books, no one
will doubt that his books were due; for ordinarily many persons designate books
as papers. But what if anyone should bequeath sheets of papyrus. In this case
neither parchments, nor any other materials used for writing, nor books which
have been commenced will be included.
(5) Wherefore, when books are bequeathed, the question is not inappropriately
asked whether those are included which are not yet completed. I do not think
they are included, any more than cloth which is not yet entirely woven is
included under the head of clothing. Books,
however, which have been written, but have not yet been beaten or ornamented,
are included in such a legacy, as well as such as are not glued together, or
corrected, and leaves of parchment which are not sewed, are also included.
(6) The legacy of papyri does not include the material for making the leaves,
nor such leaves as are not yet finished.
(7) If, however, a testator should leave a library, the question arises whether
the book-case or book-cases, or whether only the books themselves, are
included. Nerva very properly says that it is important to ascertain what the
testator intended; for the word "library" sometimes means the place where books
are kept, and at others the bookcase which contains them (as when we say, So-
and-So bought an ivory library), and sometimes this means the books themselves
as when we say, "He bought a library;" therefore, when Sabinus stated that a
library does not follow the books, this is not absolutely true, for sometimes
the book-cases, which many persons call a library, are also included.
It is clear if you should mention book-cases which are attached or connected
with the walls of the house, they undoubtedly will not be included, as they
constitute part of the building.
(8) What we have stated with reference to a library, Pomponius discusses in the
Sixth Book on Sabinus, and he says that rings are included in a legacy together
with the jewel-case which was made to contain them. He bases his opinion upon
the following bequest of a testator, "I bequeath my jewel-case, and any rings
which I may have in addition." He says that Labeo also was of the same opinion.
(9) There are some things, however, which, under all circumstances, follow the
article bequeathed, such as the bequest of a bed which also includes everything
appertaining to it, and the locks and keys are always included in legacies of
chests of drawers, or presses.
53. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IV.
It has been established that where silver plate is bequeathed, small money
boxes of that metal do not pass to the legatee.
(1) Where rings are bequeathed, jewel-cases are not included.
54. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book VII.
If I should bequeath a legacy to you absolutely, and then afterwards should
say, "Let my heir give him such-and-such a tract of land, in addition, if a
ship should arrive from Asia," the better opinion is that, by the words, "In
addition," what is first mentioned is repeated. Just as when we say, "Lucius
Titius gave five thousand aureito the people, and Seius has given, in addition,
a distribution of meat," we understand Seius to have also given five thousand
aurei.And where it is said, "Titius received five aureiand Seius a tract of
land in addition," we understand that Seius has likewise received five aurei.
55. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXV.
The term "wood" is a general one, and is divided into building material and
ordinary wood. Building material consists of what is
necessary in the construction and support of houses; ordinary wood is anything
which is intended for fuel. But should this term apply only to such as has been
cut down, or also to such as has not been cut? Quintus Mucius states, in the
Second Book, that where wood which is on the land is bequeathed to anyone, any
trees which have been felled for building material are not included, but he
does not add that what has been felled for firewood will belong to the legatee,
still, this is understood to be the case.
(1) Ofilius also states, in the Fifth Book on the Law of Partition, that where
wood is bequeathed to anyone, all will belong to him which is not called by
some other name; for example, small branches, charcoal, and olive stones, of
which no other use can be made than to burn them. The same rule applies to
acorns, and all other seeds.
(2) The same authority denies in the Second Book that where wood is bequeathed,
trees which have not yet been cut, but only such as have been split into small
pieces, are held to have been bequeathed. I think, however, that any wood which
has not yet been cut up into small pieces should also be included under the
said term, if this was intended to be done. Hence, if a testator owned a grove
which he had destined for this purpose, the grove itself would not belong to
the legatee, but any trees which had fallen down would be included, under the
term "wood," unless the intention of the testator was otherwise.
(3) In a legacy of wood intended for fuel is included such as is used for
heating baths, or for the furnaces of apartments, or for burning lime, or for
any other purpose where heat is employed.
(4) Ofilius states in the Fifth Book of the Law of Partition, that twigs are
not embraced in the term wood. But (where it is not contrary to the intention
of the testator) small branches, boughs, sprouts, and the remains of materials
used in building, as well as the stalks and roots of vines, are included.
(5) In some countries (as, for instance, in Egypt, where reeds are used for
wood, and both reeds and papyrus for fuel), certain kinds of grass, thorns, and
brambles are included in the term "wood." Is there anything extraordinary about
this ? The Greek word signifying "wood" and the one indicating ships which
transport wood, are derived from another Greek term which means marshes.
(6) In some provinces they use the dung of cattle for this purpose.
(7) Where wood has been prepared to be burned and made into charcoal, Ofilius
says, in the Fifth Book on the Law of Partition, that material of this kind is
not included in the term charcoal. But would it be included in the term fuel?
Someone perhaps might say that it would not, for the testator did not have it
in his possession to be used as fuel. Shall we enumerate, as belonging to a
class of their own, firebrands and other wood which has been partially burned
to avoid their making smoke, or shall we designate them as fire-wood, or
charcoal? The better opinion is that they belong to a class of their own.
(8) The same designation will also apply to sulphurated wood.
(9) Wood to be used for torches is not included under the term fuel, unless
this was the intention of the testator.
(10) Pine cones are also included in the term firewood.
56. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IV.
Beams and poles should be classed as building material, and therefore are not
included in the term firewood.
57. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book XXX.
Servius gave it as his opinion that where all material destined for any purpose
has been bequeathed, no boxes or chests are embraced in the legacy.
58. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book IV.
Where anyone leaves to his wife articles intended for her use, and then, during
his lifetime, while absent in a province, purchases purple cloth for her, but
does not give it to her before he dies, it was stated in a Rescript that the
purple cloth would belong to the woman.
59. Julianus, Digest, Book XXXIV.
Where anyone bequeaths a promissory note, it is understood that he had in mind
not only the tablets upon which it is written, but also the rights of action,
the proof of which is contained in the tablets. For it is clear that we use the
same "note" instead of the said rights of action; so when the note is sold, we
understand that the claim was also disposed of. Moreover, where anyone
bequeaths a claim, he is understood to have bequeathed what can be recovered by
an action at law.
60. Alfenus, On the Digest of the Epitomes by Paulus, Book II.
As the question has been raised what should be considered a bequest of lambs,
certain authorities hold that only lambs six months old are meant. The better
opinion, however, is that those are bequeathed which are less than a year old.
(1) Where urban male and female slaves are bequeathed, I gave it as my opinion
that muleteers are not included in the legacy; for only such slaves should be
included in this designation whom the head of the household is accustomed to
have about him, for his personal service.
(2) Where wool, flax and purple destined for her use were bequeathed to a wife,
as the testator had left her a great deal of wool of different kinds, the
question arose whether she was entitled to all of it. The answer was that, if
none of this wool had been intended for the use of his wife, but all of it was
mixed together, the decision must be the same as where provisions were
bequeathed, and the testator left many things which were used as provisions,
and which he was accustomed to sell, for if he had drawn different kinds of
wine to be Used by himself and his heir, it all should be held to be included
in the term "provisions." But when it was proved that the party who made the
will was accustomed to sell a portion of his provisions, it was decided that
the heir should furnish the legatee with the amount of supplies which would be
sufficient for his requirements during the year.
It seems to me that the same rule should apply to the wool, and that the woman
should receive what would be enough for her use for the term of a year; since
after what had ordinarily been required by her husband had been deducted, the
remainder should not be bequeathed to the wife, but only what was especially
intended for her use.
(3) Where land, and everything purchased or intended for the cultivation of the
same was left, it was held that neither the slave who was the gardener, nor the
forester was bequeathed, as the gardener was intended to adorn the land, and
the forester was employed for the purpose of watching and protecting it, rather
than for its cultivation.
A donkey, used for working a machine, is considered to have been bequeathed, as
well as sheep intended to manure the land, together with the shepherd, if one
had charge of sheep of this kind.
61. The Same, Epitomes of the Digest by Paulus, Book VIII.
Where certain weavers who belonged to the testator at the time of his death
were bequeathed, the question arose whether one of them whom he had
subsequently appointed porter should be included in the legacy. The answer was
that he was included, for he was not transferred to another trade but was only
temporarily assigned to a different task.
62. Julianus, On Ambiguities.
A certain man who had two mules bequeathed them as follows, "Let my heir give
to Seius my two male mules, when I die." The testator had no male mules, but
left two female mules. Servius rendered the opinion that the legacy should be
paid, because female mules are included in the term "mules," just as female
slaves are generally included in the term "slaves." Hence it comes that the
male sex always includes the female.
63. The Same, On Urseius Ferox, Book I.
In repeating legacies which have already been granted, the following words are
usually added, "Moreover, let my heir be charged to give," and Sabinus says
they are equivalent to the repetition of the conditions upon which the legacies
are dependent, and the dates on which they are to be paid.
64. Africanus, Questions, Book VI.
Where a testator appointed his son and his grandson his heirs, and gave to his
grandson under a trust certain lands, and whatever might be on them at the time
of his death "with the exception of his account book," and, when he died, a sum
of money was found in his chest in which the notes and bonds of his debtors
were kept, it was held by several authorities to be hardly probable that the
testator had the said money in his mind when he created the trust.
I, however, think that, when anyone wishes his account-book to be delivered to
another, it should be taken into consideration, whether it ought to be
understood that he expected only the notes of his debtors to be delivered, or
whether he also included the money which might be
found, if it was derived from the collection of claims, and was intended to be
loaned again.
I go still further, and hold that if the money had been collected and again
invested in a similar manner, the change of obligations would neither annul or
diminish the effect of the trust, so that if the same money was intended to be
placed in the account book, that is to say for the purpose of making new loans,
it would still be payable to the beneficiary under the terms of the trust.
Again, I think that it can be maintained that not only the money collected from
the debtors, but also such as was obtained from any other source with the
intention of being invested in the same way, would belong to the beneficiary.
65. Marcianus, Institutes, Book VII.
Where slaves are bequeathed with the exception of those who transact business,
Labeo says that those are considered to be excepted from the legacy who have
been appointed for the purpose of attending to some business; for instance,
where they have been given authority to purchase, rent, or lease property, but
those who take care of the rooms of a house, and walls, and fishermen, are not
held as included under the head of slaves who transact business. I think that
this opinion of Labeo is correct.
(1) Where a slave passes from some employment to a trade, certain authorities
very properly think that the legacy is extinguished, for the reason that the
employment was exchanged for a trade. On the other hand, the same rule does not
apply where a litter-bearer afterwards becomes a cook.
(2) Where a slave understands several trades, and cooks are bequeathed to one
legatee, weavers to another, and litter-bearers to a third, the slave above
mentioned will be considered to belong to the person to whom other slaves of
the trade in which the said slave was most frequently employed, are bequeathed.
(3) Where female slaves, assigned to dress their mistress' hair, are
bequeathed, Celsus says that those who have only been employed in this service
for two months are not included in the legacy; others, however, think that they
are, as the result might be that none of such slaves would be included, for all
can still learn something, and every occupation is capable of improvement.
This opinion should rather prevail because it is conformable to human nature.
(4) Where flocks are bequeathed, Cassius says that all quadrupeds which are
accustomed to feed together are included. Hogs are also included in this
appellation, because they feed together. Hence, Homer says in the Odyssey:
"You will find him seated by his swine, which feed Near the rock of Corax, and
the Spring of Arethusa."
(5) Where beasts of burden are bequeathed, oxen are not included, and vice
versa.
(6) Where horses are bequeathed, mares are included.
(7) Where sheep are bequeathed, lambs are not included, but it must be
ascertained from the custom of the neighborhood for how long lambs are to be
designated by this term, as in certain localities they are considered to be
sheep when they are ready to be sheared.
66. Paulus, Opinions, Book III.
Where birds are bequeathed, geese, pheasants, and chickens, as well as aviaries
will be due; but the slaves having charge of the pheasants and geese are not
included; unless the testator expressly says so.
67. Marcianus, Institutes, Book VII.
Where a testator devises his woodland pasture and in addition bequeaths
everything which is ordinarily there, he is not understood to have intended to
bequeath the flocks which during the winter are kept in winter quarters, and
during the summer are left in the pastures, but only to have meant those which
are always there.
68. Ulpianus, Opinions, Book I.
Ulpianus stated to Julianus that the testator, by adding, "The entire Seian
Estate," was understood to have left also that portion of the above-mentioned
land which seemed to be appurtenant to it by the terms of the trust, and which
he had obtained by way of pledge; the right of the debtor to the same being
reserved.
(1) The execution of a trust cannot be demanded under the following words: "Be
sure to take good care of my fields, and the result will be that my son will
give you your children."
(2) Where slaves held in common with another are bequeathed by Seia, under the
condition, "If they should be mine when I die," they will not be due; provided
the testatrix intended that they should be due if they were entirely hers at
that time.
(3) Where certain tracts of land are left, together with the stores situated
thereon, the slaves who belonged to said lands when the will was made will be
included in the legacy, as well as those who were subsequently attached to it;
provided the testator plainly showed that this was his intention.
69. Marcellus, Opinions.
The ordinary signification of words in a will must never be departed from,
unless it is evident that the intention of the testator was otherwise.1
(1) Titius provided as follows by a codicil: "I wish all the young slaves whom
I have in my service to be given to Publius Maevius." I ask at what age slaves
should be understood to be young? Marcellus was of the opinion that this must
be referred to the judge who had jurisdiction of the matter, in order to
determine what the testator meant by the words which he made use of. For, in
the case of wills,
1 "In testamentis plenius voluntates testantium interpretantur." ---ED.
attention should not always be paid to the exact definition of terms, as very
frequently persons speak incorrectly, and do not always employ appropriate
names and appellations. However, a slave may be considered young who has passed
the age of youth, until he begins to be included among old men.
70. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXII.
Where wool is left to anyone, that which is not dyed is considered to be
bequeathed, that is to say, wool in its natural condition.
(1) This also applies to such as has been worked up, or is embraced in the term
unfinished wool.
(2) The question arose whether under the term of "wool" only such is included
as has not been spun, or whether that which is spun is also meant; as, for
instance, the warp and woof. Sabinus thinks that wool which has been spun is
included, and we adopt his opinion.
(3) It is held that the word wool should be employed until it is made into
cloth.
(4) It must be understood that both washed and unwashed wool are included under
this designation, provided it is not dyed.
(5) Cow-hair used for stuffing cushions is not included in the term wool.
(6) Moreover, wool out of which anyone can make a garment either for health or
for convenience is not included.
(7) Nor will such as is prepared for application to the body or for medical
treatment be embraced in the term wool.
(8) But should skins to which the wool is attached be included? It is evident
that these are accessories to the wool.
(9) Where wool is bequeathed, it may in my opinion include the fur of hares and
goats, and the down of geese, as well as the substance obtained from a certain
plant which is called vegetable wool.
(10) Where, however, wool is bequeathed, flax is not included.
(11) Where flax is bequeathed, that which has been worked up, as well as the
unfinished article, is included, as well as what has been spun, and what is in
the web and has not yet been woven. Therefore, a difference exists in a bequest
of flax and wool. I think that where flax has been dyed it would be included in
a bequest.
(12) Where wool has changed its color, this should be taken into consideration.
It was decided by the ancient authorities that wool which has changed its color
should not be included under the term wool, but all which had been spun and not
woven should be included. Hence the question arises whether the term "changed
in color" is applicable to purple. I think that what has not been dyed is not
included under this term, and therefore that neither wool which is naturally
white or black, or of any other natural hue, is meant.
I hold, however, that purple and scarlet, as they are not natural colors,
should be included under the term dyed wools, unless the testator intended
otherwise.
(13) It is my opinion that purple of every description should be included under
this name. Scarlet should not be included, nor bluish
red, or violet. No one doubts that thread already placed in the loom should be
included under the term purple. Wool intended to be dyed purple is not
included.
71. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XX.
Where the words, "my female slave, or slaves," are inserted in a will, those
are held to be indicated whom the testator included in the number of such
slaves as belonged to him.
72. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IV.
The same must be said with reference to all other property which anyone can
bequeath as his own.
73. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XX.
By the expression "his slaves or female slaves," we understand those to be
meant who belonged to the testator by a perfect title, and that those in whom
he enjoyed only the usufruct are not included.
(1) Where freemen serve the testator in good faith as slaves, the better
opinion is that they are included under the term "his own;" provided he
intended that those who belonged to him, as well as those whom he regarded as
being his property, should be included in this appellation.
(2) There is no doubt that those slaves whom a debtor has given in pledge
should be held to have been bequeathed as his own; but this, under no
circumstances, applies to the creditor.
(3) Therefore, if anyone has slaves of his own whose services he has leased to
others, either as bakers or players, or for any other employment; should he be
held to have also bequeathed them under the name of slaves? This must be
presumed, unless the intention of the testator appears to be otherwise.
(4) I think that where a party pursues the calling of a slave trader, his
slaves cannot properly be included among those which belong to his household,
unless it was clear that this was his intention with reference to them; for
where anyone purchases slaves in order immediately to sell them, he should be
considered to hold them rather as merchandise, than as his slaves.
(5) Pomponius states in the Fifth Book that slaves belonging to other slaves
are not included in this category.
74. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book VI.
Where anyone bequeaths "his slaves," those also held in common with others, as
well as those in whom another enjoys the usufruct, are also included.
75. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XX.
Where coins, in general, are bequeathed, it is understood that those of the
smallest denominations are included; unless it appears from the terms of the
will that the intention was to depart from the custom of the testator, or of
the neighborhood.
76. The Same, On the Edict, Book II.
Where papers are bequeathed, no one can say that this refers to such as have
been written upon, and that books already made up are included in the legacy.
This also applies to tablets.
77. Javolenus, On Plautius, Book I.
Where legacies are repeated in making a substitution, grants of freedom are
also included in the repetition.
78. Paulus, On Vitellius, Book II.
The question arose, where the slave Stichus had been removed from the land to
which he had been attached, and given instruction, but had not afterwards been
returned, whether he should be delivered to the legatee with said land. The
answer was that if he had been sent for the purpose of studying, and not to be
transferred to some other land, he must be delivered to the legatee.
(1) "My son, Maevius, as I have already given you the greater part of my
property, you should be content with the Sempronian Estate, and all who live
thereon; that is to say, with the slaves who are there." The question arose as
to the disposition of certain notes of debtors, and sums of money which were
found on said land.
The same testatrix wrote the following letter: "I give you all the silver plate
and furniture which I have, and whatever I possess on the Sempronian Estate."
Will the furniture which is on other estates or in other houses belong to
Maevius, and will he be entitled to the slaves which the testator bequeathed to
others, and which formed part of the Sempronian Estate? The answer was that the
notes and the money should not be considered as included, unless the intention
of the deceased to bequeath them was positively proved, and that the legacy of
the son should be diminished through the bequest to others of slaves attached
to the said Estate.
With reference to the silver plate and furniture which were elsewhere, their
disposition must be left to the judge, who will determine to whom they should
belong, in order that the intention of the testator may be carried out by the
legatee.
(2) A testator left certain lands as follows, "Just as they were held by me,
together with whatever property may be there at the time of my death." The
question arose with reference to the slaves who dwelt on said lands either for
the purpose of cultivating them, or for other purposes, as well as with
reference to other property which was there at the time of the testator's
death, whether they belonged to the legatee. The answer was that all the
property in question should be held to have been bequeathed.
(3) "I desire that my Campanian Estate be given to Genesia, my foster-child,
the said Estate being of the value of two hundred aurei,and that it be enjoyed
by her as is customary." The question arose whether the remaining rents of the
tenants, and the slaves which were on the ground at the time of the death of
the testator, were also due to the legatee. The answer was that whatever was
due from the ten-
ants was not bequeathed, but that everything else should be held to have been
given by the words, "As is customary."
(4) It might, perhaps, be asked by someone why, under the term "silver plate"
manufactured silver should be included; when, where marble is bequeathed,
nothing except the rough material can be considered to have been indicated. The
reason for this is that articles of such a nature that they can be readily
reduced to their former condition are subject to the power of the material of
which they are composed without ever losing their force.
(5) There is no doubt that scarlet, which is designated by its peculiar name,
is not included in wool whose color has been changed, any more than dye made
from the blood of crows, or those known as hysginusand melinusare called
scarlet or purple.
(6) Where a man made a bequest as follows: "I give and bequeath to my wife
those articles which have been acquired for her use," I asked the Praetor, who
had jurisdiction of the trust, that the property which the wife had given to
her husband, and which had been appraised, might be surrendered, so that its
value might be included in the dowry, but I failed to obtain his consent, as he
held the testator did not have this property in his mind at the time when he
made his will.
If, however, the said property had been given to her for her use, it would make
no difference whether it had been obtained by herself, or by another. I
afterwards found the following case mentioned in Aburnius Valens. A woman gave
certain property, which had been appraised, by way of dowry to her husband, and
the latter afterwards left it to her, described as follows, "The articles which
have been acquired and purchased for her." This authority held that what is
given by way of dowry is not included in the category of property purchased and
acquired, unless the husband, having afterwards become the owner of said
property, devotes it to the use of his wife.
(7) Where property, which is on land, is bequeathed, the legacy also includes
things which, if not on it at the time, are usually there, and any articles
that are there by chance are not considered to have been bequeathed.
79. Celsus, Digest, Book IX.
Where a chorus, or a body of slaves were bequeathed, it is just the same as if
the individuals composing them had been separately bequeathed.
(1) Proculus says that, by the words: "I give and bequeath all movable property
which is found there," money which is deposited in that place for the purpose
of being loaned is not bequeathed, but that such as has been left there to
render it secure (as certain persons were accustomed to do during the Civil
Wars), will be included in the legacy; and he relates that he has heard old men
in the country say that money without peculiumis very easily lost, meaning by
the term peculiumwhat is put aside for safe-keeping.
(2) Where a plot of land not built upon is devised, and, in the meantime, a
house is erected upon it, and the house having bean demolished, the land again
becomes vacant, the legatee will be entitled to it, although he could not have
claimed it while the house stood there.
(3) Where a slave is bequeathed, and then, after having been manumitted, is
again reduced to slavery, he can be claimed by the legatee.
80. The Same, Digest, Book XXXV.
Heirs can be appointed conjointly or made joint legatees; that is to say, an
entire estate, or an entire legacy can be given to them individually, so that
their shares will be indivisible, unless by universal consent.
81. Modestinus, Differences, Book IX.
Certain authorities very properly hold that where slaves are bequeathed, female
slaves are included, as the common name of "slaves" includes both sexes. No
one, however, has any doubt that where female slaves are bequeathed, male
slaves are not included. Where children, who are slaves, are bequeathed, girl
slaves are included. It must be said that it is not the case, where girl slaves
are bequeathed, for boy slaves to be included.
(1) Where female slaves are bequeathed, virgins are also included, just as
where male slaves are bequeathed boys are also included.
(2) When droves of cattle are bequeathed, oxen and other beasts of burden are
included.
(3) When a herd is bequeathed, it is held that oxen are included, but not
flocks of sheep and goats.
(4) When sheep are bequeathed, certain authorities very properly hold that
neither lambs nor rams are included.
(5) There is no doubt, however, that rams and lambs are included in the bequest
of a flock of sheep.
82. The Same, Rules, Book IX.
When a slave, who ordinarily dwelt on a tract of land, takes to flight and the
land is devised in the condition in which it is, the slave will form part of
the legacy, even though he should be caught after the death of the testator.
83. The Same, Opinions, Book VI.
Where a legacy was left as follows, "I ask you to give to So-and-So, at the
time of your death, everything belonging to my estate and my property which may
come into your hands," the crops which the heir, during the lifetime, as well
as whatever took the place of the crops, were not considered to have formed a
part of the legacy, for it could not be proved that the testatrix intended that
her heir should be charged with the delivery of the crops.
(1) Where a testator left a trust for the benefit of his children, and, after
substituting them for one another, desired that, after the
death of the last survivor, the trust would pass to their descendants, I ask,
if no one remained after the death of the last child, except his freedman,
whether he ought to be admitted to the benefit of the trust. The answer was
that it was perfectly evident that by the appellation his "descendants," only
his children, and not their freedmen, were included in the number of those to
whom the trust was bequeathed.
84. Javolenus, On Cassius, Book II.
Where a testator bequeathed his property, which was at Rome, to a certain
person, he would also be entitled to whatever was stored for safe keeping in
warehouses outside the City.
85. Pomponius, On Quintus Mucius, Book II.
It has recently been decided by the Emperor, that where a testator left
property to anyone, but did not add the term "my," and did not intend to leave
the said property unless it was his, the legacy would be valid only where it
was necessary to pay more attention to the wishes of the testator than to the
word "my." Wherefore this nice distinction arises, that whenever a certain
article is bequeathed to be delivered immediately, the term "my" does not
create the condition.
If, however, property which is not expressly designated, as, for example, "My
wines, my clothing," the term "my" is held to be conditional, so that only that
is left which belonged to the testator. Still, I do not think the above-
mentioned opinion can be strongly maintained, but rather that, in this
instance, any clothing or wine which the testator considered to be his, is
bequeathed; and hence it was held that even wine which had become sour was
included in the legacy, if the testator had always considered it to be wine.
It is clear that where the testator used language relating to the time of his
death, for instance, "the clothing which shall be mine," I think that this
undoubtedly should be understood as implying a condition. I also think that,
where the testator says, "Stichus, who will be mine," the sentence ought
likewise to be considered as conditional; nor does it make any difference if he
should say, "Who will be mine," or "If he should be mine," in both cases the
bequest will be contingent. Labeo is of the opinion that the following clause,
"Who shall be mine," should only be considered by way of designation. We,
however, make use of another rule.
86. Proculus, Epistles, Book V.
Where a legacy was bequeathed as follows, "I leave my house and its contents at
the time of my death," I do not think that money collected from certain debtors
of the testator, in order to again be invested in other similar claims, forms a
part of the legacy. I thoroughly approve of the distinction made by Labeo, that
the legacy will not be diminished because something may happen to be out of the
house, any more than it may be increased because some other article happens to
be there.
87. Paulus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book IV.
A trust, and a donation mortis causa,are included in the term legacy.
88. The Same, On the Lex Julia, et Papia, Book V.It has been decided that where
wool is bequeathed, a garment made out of it is not included in the legacy.
(1) Likewise, where material such as wood is bequeathed, a ship or a chest of
drawers made out of it cannot be claimed as part of the
legacy.
(2) Where a ship, which has been bequeathed, is broken up, neither the ship
itself, nor the materials of which it is composed, will be due.
(3) Where, however, a mass of metal is bequeathed, any cup made out of it can
be demanded.
89. The Same, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book VI.
Parties are considered joint legatees where the same article is bequeathed to
them separately, by reason of the property itself, and not on account of the
words employed by the testator. They are considered joint legatees on account
of the words used, and not by reason of the property bequeathed, where the
testator says, "I give and devise such-and-such a tract of land to Titius and
Seius, share and share alike," as both legatees have their shares from the
beginning. Therefore a legatee is certainly preferred to others, where he is
joined with his co-legatee both by the property left and by the terms of the
bequest. If he should only be joined with him by the legacy of the property, it
is established that he is not entitled to any preference. But where he is
joined with him by words and not by his interest in the property, the question
arises whether the other will be entitled to the preference. The better opinion
is that he will be preferred.
90. The Same, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book VII.
Alegacy is understood to have been specifically bequeathed where the party who
is charged with it is known, even though his name may not be stated.
91. Papinianus, Opinions, Book VII.
Where a tract of land was devised to a daughter as a preferred legacy,
"Together with what is due from the stewards and tenants," the legacy of the
residue includes what remains of the rents of the lands under the same lease.
Otherwise, it could readily be established that rent collected from the tenants
and money deposited in the account-book of the testator in the same place,
would not form part of what was left, as being due from either the tenant or
the stewards, even though the testator may have expressly stated that he
desired the stewards to belong to his daughter.
(1) It was decided that where the following words are employed, "I give to
Lucius Titius such-and-such lands, with the house, in the same condition as
they may be found at the time of my death," the farming implements, and all
articles for the use of the house must be delivered under the terms of the
legacy; but anything which is due from the tenants will not be included.
(2) A father bequeathed to his son a factory used for dyeing purple, together
with the slaves appointed to conduct the business, and the purple cloth which
was there at the time of his death. It was decided that neither the money
obtained from the sale of the cloth, nor what was due from purchasers, nor any
debts of the slaves were included in the legacy.
(3) "I give and bequeath to Titius the Seian Estate in the same condition as
when I purchased it." As the Gabinian Estate had also been purchased with the
other for a single price, I gave it as my opinion that the mere proof of the
purchase was not sufficient, but that it must be ascertained from the letters
and accounts of the testator whether the Gabinian Estate was included in the
name of the Seian Estate, and whether the income of both of them had been
united and carried on the books as that of the Seian Estate.
(4) It has been established that where a house is bequeathed, the baths
constitute a part of the same. If, however, the testator permitted public
access to them, the baths will form a part of it only when they can be entered
through the building itself, and where they have sometimes been used by the
head of the household, or his wife; and the rent of the baths has been carried
on the books of the testator along with that of other rooms in the house; or
where both have been purchased or furnished with money paid out at the same
time.
(5) A certain person who owned a house bought an adjoining garden, and
afterwards devised the house. If he purchased the garden on account of the
house, in order to render the latter more pleasant and healthy, and there was
an entrance to it through the house, and the garden was an addition to the
latter, it will be included in the legacy of the house.
(6) Under the term "house" is also understood a building joined to the same, if
both were purchased for one price, and it is established that the rents of both
were carried together on the books.
92. Paulus, Opinions, Book XVI.
"If my daughters, Maevia and Nigidia, should become my heirs, then let Maevia
take from my estate, and have as a preferred legacy, such-and-such of my lands,
with the cottages thereon, and the slaves who have charge of the same; and, in
addition, all the fields adjoining them, which I have obtained by purchase or
in any other way whatsoever, for the purpose of uniting them to said lands;
together with all the slaves, flocks, beasts of burden, and other personal
property to be found on said land, or any part of the same, at the time of my
death, in the best and most perfect condition that I then possessed them, or
(to speak more plainly) everything that may be thereon." On one of the tracts
of land which had been left as a preferred legacy, there was a building used
for keeping records, in which were found instruments relating to the purchases
of many slaves, and others having reference to real property, various contracts
and the promissory notes of debtors. I ask whether these instruments were to be
considered the common property of the heirs. I answered that, according to the
facts stated, neither the documents above mentioned relating to purchases or
debts, which were found on the land left as a preferred legacy, appeared to be
included in the bequest.
(1) Where a house is devised as follows: "I charge my heirs to permit So-and-So
to have the house in which I reside, and everything included therein, without
excepting any utensils whatever," the testator is not held to have had in his
mind any money or obligations of debtors.
93. Scaevola, Opinions, Book III.
Lucius Titius made the following provision in his will: "My heir shall not,
under any circumstances, alienate my suburban estate, or my city residence."
His daughter, who was appointed his heir, left a daughter who retained
possession of the said property for a long time, and, at her death appointed
foreign heirs. The question arose whether the land belonged to Julia, who was
the grandniece of Titius the testator. The answer was that, in the case stated,
nothing had been done against the will of the deceased to prevent the property
from belonging to the heir, as the testamentary provision was a mere precept.
(1) "I direct my heirs to pay to my wife, Sempronia, a hundred aurei,which I
have borrowed from her." The question arose whether Sempronia could demand the
execution of the trust, if, having brought suit for the said sum of money as
being due to her, she should lose her case. The answer was that, according to
the facts stated, the money could be claimed under the terms of the trust,
since it appeared that it was not due for any other reason.
(2) A man devised certain lands to his freedman, and added the following words:
"As they have been possessed by me, and with whatever may be there at the time
of my death." The question arose whether the slaves who remained on the land
for the purpose of cultivating it, or for any other reason, at the time of the
death of the testator, as well as the other personal property found there,
would belong to the legatee. The answer was that they would.
(3) The question arose whether property which heirs were charged to deliver to
their brothers would also belong to their sisters. The answer was that it
would, unless it was proved that the intention of the testator was otherwise.
(4) A testator left to the guild of blacksmiths a legacy, as follows: I devise
such-and-such a tract of land, together with the forest belonging to it, in the
best and most excellent condition in which it may be." I ask whether the
personal property which was on the premises at the time of the death of the
testator, for example, the hay, the fodder, the straw, the machines, the
vessels for holding wine (that is to say the vats and casks attached to the
warehouses), and the granaries, were also bequeathed. The answer was that
anything which was not bequeathed is improperly claimed.
(5) A testator having left a certain tract of land as a preferred legacy to an
heir to whom he had bequeathed half of his estate made the following request of
him: "I request you to consent to accept Clodius
Verus, my grandson, and your relative, as your co-heir to half of the Julian
Estate, which I have directed to be given to you over and above your share." I
ask whether the grandson would be entitled to half of the estate under the
terms of the trust. The answer was that he would.
94. Valens, Trusts, Book II.
A man who left several freedmen devised a tract of land to three of them, and
requested them to see that its name was not changed. The question arose if,
when the first one of the three died, he would be obliged to leave his share to
both of his co-legatees who were joined with him in the legacy, or only to one
of them; or whether he could leave it to another who was his fellow-freedman.
It was decided that although this was a question of intention, still, the
wishes of the testator would be sufficiently complied with if the legatee
should leave the land to another of his fellow-freedmen.
Where, however, he did not give it to any, could it not be doubted whether the
claim for the execution of the trust would belong to the more diligent of the
fellow-freedmen, or to all of them; or whether it would only belong to those to
whom the legacy was jointly bequeathed? Julianus very properly held that the
claim belonged to all the freedmen.
95. Marcianus, Trusts, Book II.
"Let whoever shall be my heir be required to pay, and I charge him to pay,
whatever sums I mention." Aristo says that corporeal property is also included
in this provision, as, for example, lands, slaves, clothing, and silver plate;
because the term "whatever" does not merely refer to money, as is evident where
the legacy of a dowry and stipulations relating to a purchased estate are
involved, and that the word "sums" should be understood in the same sense as in
the instances above mentioned.
Moreover, the intention of the deceased, which must be especially considered in
the case of trusts, also depends upon this opinion; for the testator would
hardly have intended his heir to only pay money when, after this preliminary
statement, he added corporeal property.
96. Gaius, Trusts, Book II.
Where Titius was appointed heir to half an estate, and charged to deliver the
entire estate to Maevius, and then his co-heir was asked to transfer to him his
share, or a portion of the same, will Titius also be obliged to transfer to
Maevius the share which he received from his co-heir under the terms of the
trust? The Divine Antoninus, having been consulted on this point, stated in a
Rescript that he was not obliged to transfer it, because neither legacies nor
trusts are included in the term "estate."
97. Paulus, Decrees, Book II.
A certain Osidius, having appointed his daughter Valeriana his heir, and
granted freedom to his steward, Antiochus, and having
devised to the latter certain tracts of land together with his peculiumand
whatever was due, not only from him but from the tenants, the legatee produced
a statement written by the hand of the testator, showing what was owing from
him and the tenants. The following was also inserted in this instrument:
"Moreover, my steward must render an account of other property, that is to say,
such as I have set aside for my use, namely grain, wine, and other articles."
The freedmen demanded these things from the heir, alleging that they were
included in what remained due, and obtained a judgment in his favor from the
Governor.
When, on the other hand, it was stated by other interested parties that what
remained due from the tenants, or even what was due from himself had not been
demanded of him, and they claimed that the articles which had been set aside
for the use of the deceased should not be included in the balance which was
due, the Emperor interrogated the representative of the legatee, and, by way of
example, asked: "Suppose there had been set aside a hundred thousand
aurei,which were to be employed for the use of the testator, would you say that
all that was left in the chest would be due to you?" He held that the appeal
had been properly taken. It was alleged by the representative of the legatee,
that certain sums of money had been collected from the tenants, after the death
of the testator. The decision was that whatever was collected after his death
should be delivered to the legatee.
98. The Same, On the Form of a Will.
Where there are several degrees of heirs, and the following clause appears in
the will, "Let my heir give," this applies to all the degrees, just as the
following words, "Whoever shall be my heir," do. Therefore, if anyone does not
wish to burden all his heirs with the payment of legacies, but only some of
them, he must charge them specifically by name.
99. The Same, Concerning the Meaning of the Term Equipment.
When urban slaves are bequeathed, certain authorities divide those living in a
city, not by their place of residence but by their occupations, so that
although they may be in country places, still, if they do not perform rural
labor, they are held to be urban slaves. It must, however, be said that they
should be considered urban slaves whom the head of the family is accustomed to
include among those belonging to the city, and this can readily be ascertained
from the register of the slaves, as well as from the food which is furnished
them.
(1) It may be doubted whether slaves employed as hunters and bird-catchers
should be included among urban or rustic slaves. It must, however, be said that
they should belong to the place where the head of the household lives, and
furnishes them support.
(2) Muleteers belong to the class of urban slaves, unless the testator employed
them in rural labors.
(3) Some authorities hold where a child is born to a female slave belonging to
the city, and it is sent into the country to be brought up,
that it belongs to neither class. Let us see whether it should not be
understood to be included along the urban slaves. This appears to be the better
opinion.
(4) Where slaves who are litter-bearers are bequeathed, and one of them is both
a litter-bearer and a cook, he will be included in the legacy.
(5) Where slaves born in the house are bequeathed to one person, and others who
are couriers are bequeathed to another, and some of the number belong to both
these classes, they will be included among the couriers, for the reason that
the species is subordinate to the genus. Where two slaves belong to the same
genus or species, they are generally held in common.
100. Javolenus, On the Last Works of Labeo, Book II.
"I charge my heir to deliver my slave, Stichus, to Lucius Titius," or "Let him
deliver my slave to him." Cascellius says that, under a clause of this kind,
the slave must be delivered; and Labeo approves his opinion, because where
anyone is ordered to deliver anything, he is at the same time ordered to give
it.
(1) A legacy of two marble statues, as well as all the marble in the possession
of the testator was specifically bequeathed to a certain individual. Cascellius
thinks that no other marble statue, except the two mentioned, is due. Ofilius
and Trebatius are of the contrary opinion. Labeo adopts the conclusion of
Cascellius, which I believe to be correct, because by leaving two statues, it
can be held that the testator did not intend to leave any more when he
bequeathed the marble.
(2) "I give and bequeath to my wife her clothing, jewels, and all gold and
silver plate, which I have had made for her, or intended for her use."
Trebatius thinks that the words, "Which I have had made for her or intended for
her use," only refer to the gold and silver plate. Proculus holds that they
refer to everything mentioned, and this opinion is correct.
(3) In a case where Corinthian vases were bequeathed to a certain person,
Trebatius was of the opinion that the pedestals made to support them were due,
as part of the legacy. Labeo, however, does not adopt this opinion, if the
testator considered the said pedestals as vases. But Proculus very properly
says that if the vases were not of Corinthian brass, they could be claimed by
the legatee.
(4) Where articles made of tortoise-shell are bequeathed, Labeo and Trebatius
are of the opinion that beds inlaid with tortoise-shell, whose feet are covered
with silver, are due, which is correct.
101. Scaevola, Digest, Book XVI.
Aman who, in his native province, had certain lands of his own, as well as
others which had been pledged to him as security for debts, executed a codicil
as follows: "I wish to be given to my beloved country, as its share, and I give
to it separately, all the lands which I possess in Syria, together with the
personal property that is, the flocks, the slaves, the crops, the provisions,
and all the implements which are
there." The question arose whether the testator should be held also to have
left to his country the lands which are held in pledge. The answer was that,
according to the facts stated, these should not be considered to have been
left, provided they were not included in his own estate, which might be the
case if the debtor should fail to make
payment.
(1) "I ask that my tract of land, in its present condition, be given to my
foster-child." The question arose whether the balance due from the tenants as
well as the slaves, if there were any there at the time of the death of the
testator, should be included with the land. The answer was, that what was due
from the tenants was not bequeathed, but that everything else appeared to have
been included in the words, "In its present condition."
102. The Same, Digest, Book XVII.
A testator made a bequest as follows: "I bequeath to my wife my travelling
bags, and everything contained therein, as well as the claims in the small
register written by my own hand, which have not been collected at the time of
my death, although they may have been entered on my accounts as paid, and I
have transferred the securities to my
steward."
The said testator, when about to make a journey to Rome, placed the notes to
his debtors and his money in the said travelling bags, and, having collected
the notes, as well as expended the money, he returned home after the lapse of
two years, and deposited in the said travelling bags deeds for some real estate
which he had subsequently purchased, and a certain sum of money.
The question arose whether he should be considered to have only bequeathed to
the legatee the notes which, after his return, he placed in his bags. The
answer was that, according to the facts stated, the notes which were in the
bags when he died and which were not recorded by his own hand in his register
were not due under the terms of the legacy.
It was also asked, when he placed in his bags the evidences of the purchase of
the said real estate, whether these also were included in the legacy? The
answer was that it did not clearly appear what he intended to do with reference
to the lands, but if he had placed the deeds for them in the bags with the
intention that, when they were given to his legatee the ownership of the same
would pass to her, it could be maintained that the lands also constituted part
of the legacy.
(1) The father of a family made the following bequest, "I desire the two
unchased dishes, which I bought in the square where images are sold, to be
given." The testator had, in fact, purchased certain dishes in that place, but
they were not destitute of ornament, and he made his will only three days
before his death. The question arose whether the said dishes, which he had
purchased, formed part of the legacy, as he did not bequeath any others which
he bought in the same place. The answer was that, according to the facts
stated, those which he had purchased in the square of the images should be
delivered to the legatee.
(2) A testator directed that a commission in the army should be purchased for a
young man whom he had brought up, as follows: "I bequeath to Sempronius, whom I
have brought up, such-and-such articles, and, when he has arrived at the proper
age, I desire that a commission in the army shall be purchased for him, and
that all expenses and charges arising therefrom be paid." The question arose,
if Sempronius himself purchased this commission, whether he could recover the
price of the same, or whatever is customary to pay under such circumstances,
from the heirs by the terms of the trust. The answer was that, according to the
facts stated, he could do so.
(3) The same testator bequeathed a commission to his freedman, as follows, "I
give and bequeath to Seius, my freedman, such-and-such a commission," which
commission the testator himself possessed. The question arose whether all the
fees and expenses for admission to the army should be paid by the heir. The
answer was that they should be paid by him.
103. The Same, Questions Publicly Discussed.
Where a father substituted a foreign heir for his disinherited son, and the
said foreign heir afterwards appointed the son his heir, and the latter died
under the age of puberty, I think that the legacies with which the substitute
for the sum was charged will not be due, for the reason that the estate of the
father did not come into the hands of the son directly, but through indirect
succession.
(1) I have ascertained, besides, that in the case of a brother who was the heir
of his father and appointed his own disinherited brother his heir, that his
substitute will not be obliged to pay the legacy, even if he should succeed his
brother, where the latter died intestate; because the property did not come
into his hands directly, but through succession to his brother.
(2) Where a son was appointed heir to a twelfth of his father's estate, and was
charged with a legacy, and a substitute was appointed for him, and, afterwards,
his other brother came within the scope of the Edict, and he obtained praetorian
possession of half of the estate; the question arose whether his substitute
would be required to pay the legacies in proportion to a twelfth, or in
proportion to half of the estate. The better opinion is that he would be
obliged to pay in proportion to half, but if he paid in proportion to a
twelfth, it must be paid to all, and payment should be made to the children and
other relatives in proportion to the balance.
(3) On the other hand, if the son was appointed heir to three-fourths of the
estate, and having come within the scope of the Edict, he should obtain
praetorian possession of half of the property, the substitute would only owe the
legacies proportionally; for just as they are increased where praetorian
possession of the estate is greater, so also they are reduced, where it is
less.





