THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS. BOOK XXXV.


TITLE I.
CONCERNING TESTAMENTARY CONDITIONS AND DESIGNATIONS, THEIR REASONS AND THEIR
MODIFICATIONS.
1. Pomponius, On Quintus Mucius, Book III.
Either uncertain times or conditions are imposed upon legacies which are
bequeathed; and if this is not done, they take effect at once, unless, by their
very character, they are dependent upon some condition.
(1) Where a certain date is prescribed for the payment of a legacy, even though
the time has not yet arrived, the heirs can, nevertheless, pay it, because it
is certain that it will be due.
(2) When the time is uncertain, as in the following instance, "Let my heir pay
ten aureiwhen he dies," as the date of his death is uncertain, hence, if the
legatee should die before him the legacy will not pass to his heir, for the
reason that the time did not arrive during his lifetime, although it is certain
that the heir will die some time or other.
(3) A condition is inserted in a legacy for example, where we make a bequest as
follows, "Let my heir give the child born of Arescusa the slave," or "Let my
heir give the crops which may be collected from such-and-such an estate," or
"Let my heir give to Seius the slave whom I may have not bequeathed to anyone
else."
2. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book V.
There are certain conditions which can be fulfilled even during the lifetime of
the testator, for instance, "If a ship should come from Asia," for the
condition will be held to have been fulfilled when the
ship arrives. There are others which cannot be complied with until after the
death of the testator, as "If he should pay him ten aurei,if he should ascend
to the Capitol." For before anyone can be held to have complied with the
condition, he must know that it has been inserted in the will; for if he should
comply with it unintentionally he would not be considered to have carried out
the wish of the testator.
3. The Same, On Sabinus, Book VI.
It has been established that where impossible conditions are prescribed by a
will they shall be considered as void.
4. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book III.
Where legacies are bequeathed to persons to whom a patron is obliged to pay
them, the Praetor should regulate the condition so that the amounts received by
the patron and the appointed heirs, in compliance with the condition prescribed
by the will, shall be in proportion to the respective shares of the legatees.
(1) Where the following provision was included in a will, "If a son should not
be born to Titius within the next five years, let my heir then pay ten aureito
Seia," and Titius should die before that time, Seia will not be immediately
entitled to the ten aurei,because the word "then" means the date of the
expiration of the five years.
5. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book II.
A ward can comply with a condition without the authority of his guardian. Let
no one be apprehensive for the reason that, when the condition has been
fulfilled, he may, in some cases, become the necessary heir, as he will become
such by the right of paternal control, and not through the fulfillment of the
condition.
(1) Likewise, a slave or a son under paternal control can comply with a
condition without the order of his father or his master, because no one is
defrauded by his own act.
6. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book III.
A penalty is not imposed by a will upon an heir or legatee or upon anyone who
profits in some manner by the last will of the testator, if he is ordered to
erect a monument in accordance with the judgment of someone, and he who is to
be consulted is not living, or cannot be present, or is unwilling to give his
advice.
(1) Where an heir was directed to manumit certain slaves, and some of them died
before the will was executed, Neratius gave it as his opinion that the heir had
failed to comply with the condition, but he did not decide whether the latter
was able to comply with the condition, or not. Servius, however, held that,
where the following was written, "If my mother and my daughter should survive
me," and one of them died, the condition had not failed.
The same rule is also stated by Labeo. Sabinus and Cassius think that where
conditions considered impossible are inserted into a will they ought to be
regarded as not having been written, and this opinion should be adopted.
7. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XVIII.
The advantage derived from the Mucian bond is apparent in conditions where
something is not to be done; as, for instance, "If he should not ascend to the
Capitol," "If he should not manumit Stichus," and in other cases of the same
kind. This opinion was held by Aristo, Neratius, and Julianus, and is also
confirmed by a Constitution of the Divine Pius. The above-mentioned remedy was
held not only to apply to legacies but also to inheritances.
(1) Where a wife appoints her husband, to whom she had promised her dowry, heir
to a share of her estate, "If he should not demand, or exact the dowry which I
have promised him," the husband must notify his co-heir that he is ready to
give a receipt for the dowry, or to furnish security that he will not claim it,
and he can then enter upon the estate. If, however, the husband should be
appointed heir to the entire estate, under the same condition, and there should
not be anyone to whom he can furnish such security, he will not be prevented
from entering upon the estate on this account. For the condition will be
considered to have been fulfilled by operation of law, because after he has
once entered upon the estate, there is no one against whom he can bring an
action to recover the dowry.
8. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book V.
Where anyone makes a bequest as follows, "Let my heir pay such-and-such a sum
to my wife, as long as she remains with my son," and the wife, desiring to
avoid her patron, leaves the neighborhood, but still retains the intention of
keeping her children with her, Trebatius and Labeo say that she will be
entitled to the legacy, because she should not be required to be every moment
with her children; but the only question is whether she has the intention and
design of not sending her son away, and whether it is not her duty to keep her
son with her while he is being reared.
9. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XX.
Where a husband bequeathed a legacy to his wife payable when she had children,
we are accustomed to say that he did not have in his mind those children whom
his wife already had at the time when he made his will.
10. The Same, On Sabinus, Book XXIII.
The following condition, "I bequeath to my daughter, when she is married,"
signifies that the person who executed the will intended that the condition
should only be fulfilled, and that it made no difference when this was done.
Therefore, if the daughter should marry after the will was made, and during the
lifetime of the testator, the condition will be held to have been complied
with, and especially where it is of such a character that it should be complied
with but once.
All material unions, however, do not bring about the fulfillment of a
condition; for instance, where a girl who is not yet nubile is married, she
does not comply with the condition. We say that the same rule
will apply if she should marry anyone with whom she cannot be united according
to law. But can any doubt arise whether she can comply with the condition by
marrying afterwards, just as if she had not married the first time? If the
testator had had in his mind the first marriage of his daughter, I think that
the condition has failed; still the indulgent interpretation should be given
that as the condition has not yet been fulfilled, it has not failed.
(1) Where a legacy was bequeathed under the following condition: "If a ship
should arrive from Asia," and the ship should arrive at the time that the will
was made, but the testator was ignorant of the fact; it must be said that the
condition has been fulfilled. This must also be said where a bequest is left to
anyone, "When he arrives at puberty."
11. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book IV. .
Where those things have already been done which were imposed by way of
condition, and the testator was aware that they can be done a second time, the
parties must wait until they are done the second time. If, however, the
testator did not know this, the legacies will be due immediately.
(1) It also should be remembered that ordinary conditions must be fulfilled
after the death of the testator, if this is necessary in order to comply with
the provisions of the will, as, for example, "If he should ascend to the
Capitol," and others of this kind. Unusual conditions can also be fulfilled
during the lifetime of the testator, for instance, "If Titius should become
Consul."
12. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXIV.
When a bequest is made as follows, "As my eldest son has taken ten aureiout of
my chest, let my younger son take the same amount from the bulk of my estate,"
the legacy will be due, because it has been left in order that the condition of
the children might be rendered equal. And it is clear that this is the case,
for where anything is bequeathed for some reason, it refers to the past, but
one which is left by way of penalty has reference to the future.
13. Paulus, On Sabinus, Book V.
Where an estate is left to anyone under the condition, "If he pays a certain
sum to a minor, or an insane person," the legatee will be held to have complied
with the condition if he pays the money to the curator or the guardian of the
party interested.
14. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book VIII.
"Let Titius be my heir, if he erects statues in the city." If he is ready to
erect the statues, but the municipal authorities will not furnish him with a
place for that purpose, Sabinus and Proculus hold that he will become the heir,
and that the same rule of law applies to a legacy.
15. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XXXV.
Where a legacy is bequeathed under the following condition, "If she should
marry in my family," the condition is held to have been complied with as soon
as the marriage ceremony has been performed, although the woman has not yet
entered the bed-chamber of her husband, for consent and not cohabitation
constitutes marriage.
16. Gaius, On the Edict of the Praetor Relating to Wills.
Where questions arise with reference to matters foreign to the will, they must
receive a just and liberal interpretation; but those which arise concerning the
will itself must be determined in strict accordance with the rules of the
written law.
17. The Same, On the Edict of the Praetor Relating to Legacies.
A designation is incorrect where it is made as follows, "I bequeath the slave
Stichus, whom I have bought of Titius, the Tusculan estate which was presented
to me by Seius," for if it is known to what slave or to what estate the
testator referred, it will not be material if he whom he said that he had
bought was really given to him, or if what he indicated had been donated to him
he in fact had purchased.
(1) Therefore, where a slave is bequeathed as follows, "I bequeath to Titius my
cook Stichus, my shoemaker Stichus," although the slave may be neither a cook
nor a shoemaker, he will belong to the legatee, if it should positively be
ascertained that the testator had him in mind when he made the bequest. For
even if the mistake is made in designating the person of the legatee, but it is
clear to whom the testator intended to make the bequest, it will be as valid as
if no error had been committed.
(2) This rule with reference to a false designation is still more applicable
where the reason is incorrectly stated, as, for instance, as follows, "I give
such-and-such an estate to Titius, because he has had charge of my business."
Likewise, "Let my son Titius receive, as a preferred legacy, such-and-such a
tract of land, because his brother took such-and-such a sum of aureifrom my
chest," for even if the brother did not take the said sum of money from the
chest, the legacy will be valid.
(3) But if the legacy is mentioned in terms which impose a condition, for
instance, as follows, "I give such-and-such a tract of land to Titius, if he
has transacted my business," "Let my son Titius receive such-and-such a tract
of land, as a preferred legacy, if his brother took a hundred aureifrom my
chest," the legacy will be valid if the legatee transacted the business, or his
brother took a hundred aureiout of the chest.
(4) Where a legacy is bequeathed to anyone dependent upon his performing some
act, as, for example, erecting a monument to the testator, or constructing some
public work, or giving a banquet to the people of the city, or paying part of
the legacy to another, the legacy will be considered to have been bequeathed
under a certain modification.
18. The Same, On the Provincial Edict, Book XVIII.
Where property is left to anyone under the condition of his not doing
something, he must give security by means of the Mucian Bond to him to whom the
legacy or the estate will belong under the Civil Law if the condition should
fail to be complied with.
19. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book V.
The intention of the deceased occupies the first place in the conditions
prescribed by him, and it controls the conditions. Hence, with reference to the
following, "If my daughter should marry Titius," it was held that the date of
the death of the testator ought not always to be considered, but that the time
for the fulfillment of the condition could be extended beyond that event, where
this was the wish of the testator.
(1) The following clause, "If the first should be my heir, let him be charged
to pay," is not to be considered as implying a condition; for the testator
seems rather to have intended to indicate when the legacy should be payable
than to insert a provision, unless he meant to impose a condition; hence the
following should not be held to prescribe a condition, "I give and bequeath
whatever is due to me at Ephesus."
If, however, a bequest is made as follows, "If the first should not be my heir,
let the second be charged to pay," and the first becomes the heir, the legacy
will not be due. If the first should enter upon the estate, along with the
second, there can be no doubt whatever that the condition has not been
fulfilled.
(2) Where a patron, having obtained possession of an estate contrary to the
provisions of the will, receives the share which is due to him by law, his co-
heir will not be obliged to pay to him any legacies which have been bequeathed
under the following condition, "If my patron should not be my heir."
(3) Where the first heir has been charged with a legacy as follows, "If the
second should not be my heir, let him pay Titius twenty aurei,"and, in like
manner if the second heir is charged with a bequest to Titius as follows, "If
the first should not be my heir," and both parties become the heirs, the
condition of the legacy will not be fulfilled. If one of the heirs should
obtain the estate, and the other should not, the legacy will be due.
20. Marcellus remarks as follows on Julianus, Digest, Book XXVII.
We have no doubt that dishonorable conditions should be referred back to those
who imposed them. Among these are, generally speaking, such as require an oath.
21. Julianus, Digest, Book XXXI.
It makes a great deal of difference whether the condition is one of fact or one
of law. For conditions like the following, "If a ship should arrive from Asia,"
"If Titius should become Consul," although they may not be fulfilled, they
prevent the heir from entering upon the estate, so long as he is ignorant that
they remain unfulfilled. Those,
however, which refer to matters of law, only require to be unfulfilled whether
the heir is aware of the fact or not. For instance, where anyone thinks he is
under paternal control, when he is, in reality, the head of a household, he can
acquire an estate. Wherefore, when anyone is appointed heir to a portion of an
estate, although he may be ignorant whether the will has been opened or not, he
can still enter upon the estate.
22. The Same, Digest, Book XXXV.
Whenever a bequest is made to a wife under the condition that she will not
marry, and she is charged to deliver the property bequeathed to Titius if she
should marry, it has been well established that if she marries she can claim
the legacy, and will not be compelled to execute the trust.
23. The Same, Digest, Book XLIII.
Where a testator directed his legatee to pay ten aureito his two heirs, and to
take for himself a certain tract of land, the better opinion is that the heir
cannot divide the condition, unless the legacy is also divided. Therefore,
although he may have paid five aureito one of the heirs, he can claim no part
of the land unless he pays the remaining five to the heir who enters upon the
estate; or if he should reject it, he pays the entire ten to the one who alone
accepts it.
24. The Same, Digest, Book XXXV.
It has been established by the Civil Law that a condition is always considered
to have been fulfilled where the party who is interested in not having this
done opposes its fulfillment. Many authorities have extended the application of
this rule to legacies and the appointment of heirs. Certain jurists have also
very properly held that in cases of this kind, stipulations become operative
when attempts are made by the promisor to prevent the stipulator from complying
with the condition.
25. The Same, Digest, Book LXIX.
Where a husband bequeaths his estate to his wife, and they have children, and
the woman, after a divorce has been obtained, has children by another man, and
then, the second marriage having been dissolved, she returns to her first
husband, the condition is not understood to have been complied with, for it is
probable that the testator did not have in his mind the children who, during
his lifetime, had been begotten by another man.
26. The Same, Digest, Book LXXXII.
The following clause, "If he should pay twenty aureior swear that he will
perform a certain act," includes a condition which has two parts. Hence, if
anyone should be appointed an heir under the condition that he will swear that
he will pay ten aurei,or erect a monument, although he will be permitted, under
the terms of the Edict, to
receive the estate or the legacy, he will still be compelled to do what he was
ordered to swear that he would do, as only the oath can be remitted.
(1) Where the same property is bequeathed to one person absolutely, and to
another conditionally, or where one heir is appointed absolutely, and another
under a condition, and the condition fails, half of the legacy or the estate
will accrue to the heir or the legatee to whom the legacy or the estate was
absolutely bequeathed, provided the party accepted his share of the same.
27. Alfenus Varus, Digest, Book V.
A certain individual provided in his will that a monument, like that of Publius
Septimius Demetrius which stands on the Salarian Way, should be erected to him,
and if this was not done, that his heirs should be liable to a considerable
fine. As no monument to Publius Septimius Demetrius could be found, but there
was one erected to Publius Septimius Damas, and it was supposed that the party
who made the will intended that a monument should be erected to him like the
one aforesaid, the heirs asked advice as to what kind of a monument they would
be obliged to erect, and whether they would be liable to the penalty if they
did not erect any, because they could not find one to use as a pattern. The
answer was that if it could be ascertained what kind of a monument the party
who made the will intended to designate, even though he may not have described
it in his will, it should still be erected in accordance with what he wished to
indicate.
If, however, his intention was not known, the penalty would have no force or
effect, as there was no monument found which could serve as a pattern for the
one which he ordered to be erected; but the heirs must, nevertheless, erect a
monument corresponding in every respect with the wealth and rank of the
deceased.
28. Paulus, Epitomes of the Digest of Alfenus, Book III.
A testator made the following bequest to his daughter, "If my daughter, Attia,
should marry with the consent of Lucius Titius, let my heir give her such-and-
such a sum." Titius having died before the testator Attia married, the question
arose whether she would be entitled to the legacy. The answer was that she
would.
(1) "Let my wife Attia take the boy Philargyrus and the girl Agathea from the
slaves who will belong to me at the time of my death." The testator sold
Agathea, whom he owned at the time he made the will, and afterwards bought
other female slaves, to one of whom he gave the name of Agathea.
The question arose whether she should be considered as having been bequeathed.
The answer was that she should be.
29. Julianus, On Urseius Ferox, Book I.
The following condition, "If he should ascend to the Capitol," should be
understood to mean if he should ascend to the Capitol as soon as he could.
30. The Same, On Minicius, Book I.
If an entire estate should be bequeathed to me separately and absolutely, and
to you conditionally, and you should die before the condition was complied
with, I will not be required to comply with it, as even if the condition should
fail, the share which you could have claimed will accrue to me.
31. Africanus, Questions, Book II.
The following provision was inserted into a will, "Let Stichus and Pamphila be
free, and if they should be united in marriage, let my heir be charged to pay
them a hundred aurei."Stichus died before the will was opened. The answer was
that" the right to the share of Stichus was extinguished, and that, as it
appeared that Pamphila had failed to comply with the condition, her share would
therefore remain in the possession of the heir.
If, however, both of them had lived, and Stichus had refused to marry her while
the woman was ready to marry him, she would be entitled to her share of the
legacy, but the right of Stichus to his share would be extinguished. For where
a legacy is bequeathed to anyone as follows, "Let my heir pay a hundred aureito
Titius, if he marries Seia," and Seia should die, Titius is understood to have
failed to comply with the condition. But if he himself should die, he will not
transmit the legacy to his heir, because by his death the condition is
understood not to have been fulfilled. Where, however, both of them are living,
and he refuses to marry her, for the reason that the condition fails through
his act, he cannot obtain the legacy; but if the woman is unwilling to marry
him, and he is ready to marry her, he will be entitled to it.
32. The Same, Questions, Book IX.
Although the words, "Render his accounts," have no other signification than to
pay the balance which was due, still, if less than is due is paid by a slave
who is to be free under a certain condition, through the fault of the heir, and
not on account of any fraud committed by the slave, and he is considered to
have rendered his accounts in good faith, he will become free; and, unless this
rule is observed, no slave who is manumitted under a condition would ever
obtain his freedom, if, through want of knowledge, he should pay less than he
ought to have paid.
This must be understood to refer to cases where a slave is ordered to render
his accounts, and, through some mistake but without fraudulent intent, he does
so in such a way that his master may also be mistaken with -reference to his
calculation.
33. Marcianus, Institutes, Book VI.
A false designation does not benefit the legatee, the beneficiary of the trust,
or an heir who has been appointed; for instance, where" the testator
incorrectly refers to his brother, his sister, his grandson, or anything else.
This was provided for by the Civil Law, as well as by the Constitutions of the
Divine Severus and Antoninus.
(1) Where, however, a controversy arises with reference to several persons
having the same name, that one will be admitted to the succession who can prove
that the deceased had reference to him.
(2) Where a bequest is made to anyone as to a freedman, that is to say, by
mentioning him among other freedmen, he should not lose the legacy for the
reason that afterwards he may have received a gold ring from the Emperor, for
his dignity is increased, and his condition is not altered, as was stated by
the Divine Severus and Antoninus in a Rescript.
(3) If anyone should bequeath property as follows, "If it should belong to me
at the time of my death," and it is not found at that time, the appraised value
of said property will not be considered to have been bequeathed.
(4) But what if anyone should provide by his will as follows, "I give and
bequeath Stichus and Pamphilus to Titius, if they should belong to me at the
time of my death," and he should alienate one of them, could the other be
claimed by the legatee? It was decided that he could be claimed, for this
clause, although it is in the plural number, must be understood just as if the
testator had said separately, "I give and bequeath Stichus if he should be mine
at the time of my death."
34. Florentine, Institutes, Book XL
Where a bequest is made to anyone specifically, as, for example, to Lucius
Titius; it would make no difference whether he designated him in this way, or
by mentioning his physical characteristics, his trade, employment,
relationship, or affinity; for a designation of this kind generally takes the
place of the name, nor is it of any consequence whether it be false or true,
provided it is positively known whom the testator meant.
(1) There is this difference between designation and a condition: a designation
generally refers to something which has already been done, a condition to
something which is to take place.
35. Pomponius, Rules.
The easiest of several conditions upon which freedom is dependent is considered
to be the one which leads most directly to freedom, although it may be, by
nature, harder and more difficult of accomplishment than the others.
36. Marcellus, Opinions.
Publius Maevius provided by his will as follows: "I give and bequeath, and
charge whoever shall be my heirs to pay to my sister's son Gaius Seius, forty
aureifor his expenses during his Consulate." Seius was appointed Consul during
the lifetime of Maevius, and gave the ordinary present, and afterwards, upon the
Kalendsof January, assumed the duties of the Consulate, and then Maevius died.
I ask whether Seius would be entitled to the forty aurei.Marcellus answered
that he would.
(1) Titia made the following provision with reference to certain lands which
she had left to Septitia by her will, "I charge you, Septitia, to give to my
son the same lands when he shall have reached the age of sixteen years. If,
however, my said son should not reach the age of sixteen years, I charge you to
deliver the said lands to Publius Maevius and Gaius Cornelius."
As Septitia died, and the son also died during his fifteenth year, I ask
whether the trust should be executed, and the heirs of Septitia be compelled to
deliver the land to Publius Maevius and Gaius Cornelius, the son not having
completed his fifteenth year. Marcellus answered that Septitia had transmitted
to her heirs the same right which she herself had in the land; for it would be
contrary to the intention of the testatrix for the execution of the trust to be
demanded immediately, as in that case more benefit would be derived by the
substitutes than by the boy, either through Septitia or her heirs.
The words used by the testatrix would, indeed, seem to indicate that the trust
should be executed as soon as her son died, but it is not probable that she
intended the benefit to be enjoyed by the substitutes sooner than it could have
been by her son. The aspect of the case is not at all changed because Septitia
died first, for even if the boy had lived, the heirs of Septitia could not have
been sued by him any sooner than Septitia herself could.
37. Paulus, On the Lex Fusia Caninia.
If anyone should make a bequest to a slave, whom he himself could not manumit,
under the condition that "his legatee should manumit him," the legatee will not
be excluded from receiving the legacy, but he cannot be compelled to manumit
the slave, as one is only obliged to execute the will of the testator, when, by
its terms, nothing is to be done contrary to law; and this opinion was stated
by Neratius.
The legatee will not be deprived of the legacy, as the testator preferred that
he should obtain the benefit of the slave rather than that his own heir should
have him.
38. The Same, On the Law of Codicils.
If I should say in my will, "I bequeath to So-and-So as much as I shall
bequeath to Titius by my codicil," although the legacy is only explicitly
mentioned by the codicil, still it is valid under the terms of the will, and
only the amount inserted in the codicil will be due. For legacies like the
following were sustained by the ancients, namely, "Let my heir give to So-and-
So an amount equal to that I shall state to him in a letter, or which I shall
obtain from such-and-such an action."
39. Javolenus, On the Last Works of Labeo, Book I.Where a condition has
reference to a certain class of persons, and not to individuals who are well
known, we think that it relates to the
entire will, and to all the heirs who have been appointed; but where the
condition only has reference to certain individuals, we should consider it as
relating only to that degree in which the said parties have been appointed
heirs.
(1) Where a clause was inserted in a will providing that a "building may be
erected in the Forum," and it is not stated in what Forum, Labeo says that if
it does not appear what the intention of the deceased was, the building should
be erected in the Forum of the town in which the party who made the will
resided. I also approve this opinion.
40. The Same, On the Last Works of Labeo, Book II.
If your neighbor should, upon certain days, hinder you from using a highway
when you wish to travel upon it in order to comply with a condition, and you
are not to blame for not bringing an action against him to prevent him from
doing this, these days shall not be included in the time imposed by the
condition.
(1) A certain man made a bequest as follows, "If Publius Cornelius should pay
my heir for the expense which I have incurred with reference to the Seian
Estate, then let my heir deliver the Seian Estate to Publius Cornelius."
Cascellius said that the legatee ought also to pay to the heir the price of the
land. Ofilius denies that the price is included in the term "expenses," but
that only -those expenses are meant which the party paid out of the land after
it had been purchased. Cinna holds the same opinion, and adds that an account
of the expenses must be taken without deducting the profits. I think that this
is the better opinion.
(2) A testator bequeathed a hundred aureito Titius, and afterwards made the
following provision in his will, "Let my heir give the sums of money which I
have bequeathed, if my mother should die." Titius survived the testator, and
died during the life of the mother. Ofilius gave it as his opinion that, after
the death of the mother, the heirs of Titius were entitled to the legacy, as it
had not been left under a condition, but had been bequeathed absolutely in the
first place, and the time of its payment had been added afterwards. Labeo says,
"Let us see if this opinion is not false," because it makes no difference
whether a bequest is made as follows, "Let my heir pay to my legatee the money
which I have bequeathed to him, if my mother should die," or, in these terms,
"Let him not pay the money, unless my mother should die," for, in either
instance, the legacy is given or taken away under a condition.
I approve the opinion of Labeo.
(3) A master bequeathed five aureito his slave, as follows: "Let my heir pay to
my slave Stichus, whom I have ordered to be free by my will, the five
aureiwhich I owe him on account." Namusa says that Servius gave it as his
opinion that the bequest of the slave was void, because a master cannot be
indebted to his slave. I think that, according to the intention of the
testator, the debt should rather be considered a natural than a civil one, and
this is the present practice.
(4) A husband, who had received no dotal land, made the following testamentary
disposition, "Let my heir give to my wife the Cornelian Estate, which she gave
to me as her dowry," Labeo, Ofilius, and Trebatius held that the devise of the
land was, nevertheless, binding, because as the Cornelian Estate actually
existed, the false designation did not affect the devise.
(5) Thermus Junior mentioned in his will the names of certain persons by whose
advice he desired a monument to be erected to himself, and then made the
following bequest, "Let my heir pay to Lucius, Publius, and Cornelius a
thousand aureifor the purpose of erecting my monument." Trebatius gave it as
his opinion that this is just the same as if the bequest had been made on
condition that the party should give security for the erection of the monument
with the said money. Labeo concurs in the opinion of Trebatius, because it was
the intention of the testator that the sum should be used for the erection of a
monument. Both Proculus and myself approve this opinion.
41. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XXXIV.
When a legacy is bequeathed under a condition, it does not become payable at
once, but only after the condition has been complied with, and hence it cannot,
in the meantime, be transferred by the heir.
42. Africanus, Questions, Book II.
A legacy was bequeathed to a son under paternal control, subject to the
condition that he remained in the power of his father. It was held that the
legacy seemed to have been bequeathed to the father, and that the latter could
claim it in his own name.
The same rule of law applies where a bequest is made in this way to a slave.
The proof of this contention is, that even though provisions should be
bequeathed to the slaves of Titius, there is no doubt that the legacy belongs
to the master and not to the slaves.
43. Paulus, On Plautius, Book VIII.
Plautius: An heir was charged by the testator, who was a freedman, to sell the
entire estate and reserve ten aureifor himself. The patron of the deceased
subsequently claimed possession of the estate in opposition to the will, and
took that portion of the same to which he was entitled by law. Proculus and
Cassius say that the beneficiary can recover from the heir a sum in proportion
to what he himself has paid.
Paulus: This is the present practice, for as an heir, through the payment of
trusts and legacies, is discharged from liability by the Praetor, so also he
should receive his share of the same.
(1) The case is different where the Falcidian Law applies, and reduces the
amount of the legacies, since in instances of this kind nothing can be
recovered, because the condition has been entirely complied with.
(2) Likewise, the right of payment is restricted where the party to whom the
bequest was made cannot take the entire share of the estate which may be left
to him, for the better opinion is that he should pay a part, and that those
also should pay a part whose shares have
been increased by the amount taken from him to whom more had been left than is
allowed by law.
(3) Neratius, in the First Book of Opinions, states that where two heirs have
been appointed, and one of them is requested to deliver the estate to you, and
you are asked to pay a certain sum to Titius, and the heir avails himself of
the benefit of the Falcidian Law in delivering the property, it is not
inequitable that you should pay as much less to Titius as the heir ought to pay
to you.
44. The Same, On Plautius, Book IX.
Where anyone is directed to pay a certain sum to an heir, and the latter is a
slave belonging to another, he should not pay the sum to the master, for even
if some other heir had been appointed, and directed to pay the sum to the heirs
of Titius, it should be paid to the slave himself, because things which have
already been done do not pass to the master; just as where I stipulate for
myself or for the slave of Titius, payment should be made, not to Titius, but
to his slave. These opinions are correct.
(1) Where, however, a party is ordered to pay the heir, let us see whether the
payment should be made to his master. It follows in this instance that payment
should be made to the slave.
(2) It is certain that a slave who is to be free under some condition must pay
the master.
(3) On the other hand, a legatee who is charged with payment to the master does
not comply with the condition by giving the amount to the slave, unless the
master consents. For no one can comply with the condition in a case of this
kind, if I am either ignorant or unwilling.
(4) Where an estate is returned in compliance with the Trebellian Decree of the
Senate, it should be given to the heir in order that the condition may be
complied with, and it should not be returned by the latter under the trust.
(5) When an heir enters upon an estate which he suspects of being insolvent,
and gives it back to the trustee, a doubt may arise whether he shall be
deprived of it, and the more equitable opinion is that, in this instance, he
will not be deprived of anything.
(6) Where, however, I am appointed heir, and a controversy arises as to my
right to the estate, if the legatee should furnish security to return the
legacy in case the estate should be evicted, security should also be given to
him to return what he paid.
(7) But if you should be ordered to pay me the sum of ten aurei,and receive the
estate, under the Decree of the Senate, I shall not be compelled to return you
the said ten aurei,by virtue of the trust.
(8) Where a legacy is bequeathed to a slave belonging to two masters, under the
condition of his paying something to the heir, certain authorities hold that
the condition cannot be partially complied with, but that the money should be
paid at once. I, however, hold the contrary opinion.
(9) Where a part of the property bequeathed has been acquired by a third party
through usucaption, I doubt whether the condition should
be complied with in full. I think it can be said that it may be partially
complied with, in accordance with the intention of the testator.
(10) Plautius: I bequeath a tract of land to one of several heirs under the
condition that he will pay a hundred aureito my heirs. He must deduct his share
of the estate, and give the remainder to the heirs in proportion to their
respective shares. Where, however, he had been appointed heir to a share of the
estate, "if he should pay ten aureito the heirs," he could only become the heir
by paying the entire ten aureito his co-heirs; because he could not be admitted
to the succession before he paid the entire sum. For, in the case where a slave
is granted his freedom by will, and made an heir to a share of the estate on
condition that he pays ten aureito the heirs, it was decided that he would not
be free and become an heir until he had paid the entire sum of ten aureito his
co-heirs.
Paulus: This is our practice at present.
45. The Same, On Plautius, Book XVI.
Julianus says that where a legacy has been left to a person under the condition
that he pays his heir ten aureiand the heir gives him a receipt for what he
owes him, he is not considered as having complied with the condition, as he
would if he had actually made payment; but, as it was the heir's fault that the
condition was not complied with, the legacy can be claimed just as if this had
been done.
46. The Same, On Vitellius, Book III.
If, for example, a slave who is to be free under the condition of paying a
certain sum of money in a hundred days, and the beginning of the term is not
mentioned, it will begin to run from the day that the estate is entered upon,
because it is absurd to hold that it would begin before the time arrived when
he who was entitled to the legacy would be able to receive it.
This rule will apply to all legatees who are directed to pay the heir under
such circumstances. Therefore the time for complying with the condition by the
legatee will be computed from the day when the estate was entered upon.
47. Marcellus, Digest, Book XIV.
A master bequeathed freedom to his slave as follows, "Let him be free if he
belongs to me at the time of my death." He gave the legacy or the estate to him
unconditionally, and then sold him. The legacy or the estate will be due to his
new master, and the slave can accept it by his order; for the testator in
granting him his liberty expressly stated, "If he belongs to me," with the
result that, even if this condition had not been explicitly mentioned, his
freedom would be prevented. Still, the disposition of property is very
frequently changed, even where the testator specifically indicated something
which, if it was not done, would still be understood.
48. The Same, Digest, Book XV.
I do not think that the time for the execution of a trust has arrived when the
beneficiary of the same has entered his sixteenth year, and
the condition was when he should have reached the age of sixteen years. The
Emperor, Aurelius Antoninus, rendered this decision in the case of an appeal
from Germany.
49. Celsus, Digest, Book XXII.
Where an heir is charged to make a payment of a sum of money, or a slave is
ordered to be free in ten years, the legacy will be payable, or the grant of
freedom will become operative on the last day of the term.
50. Ulpianus, On the Duties of Consul, Book I.
Where freedom was bequeathed directly to a slave under condition of his
rendering his accounts, the Divine Pius permitted the Consuls to appoint an
arbiter to decide the matter in the following words, "The Consuls, having been
applied to by you, shall appoint an arbiter to examine the accounts, and to
decide not only what balance is due from Epaphroditus, as well as what accounts
and what documents he must deliver or show to his masters, and when the
judgment of the arbiter has been complied with, the freedom of Epaphroditus
will no longer be interfered with."
51. Modestinus, Differences, Book V.
Where a slave is ordered to be free under different conditions separately
imposed, he can select the condition which seems to him to be the easiest
complied with. Where, however, a legacy is bequeathed in this manner, the
legatee must comply with the last condition imposed.
(1) A slave was directed to pay ten aureito the heir and become free, and, by
paying the amount to the heir of the heir, he can obtain his freedom. Publicius
says that, under similar circumstances, this rule must not be observed with
reference to a legatee.
52. The Same, Differences, Book VII.
It sometimes happens that certain provisions in a will, when explicitly stated,
are disadvantageous, although if they could be tacitly understood this would
not be the case. This occurs where a legacy is bequeathed to someone as
follows, "I give and bequeath ten aureito Titius, if Maevius should ascend to
the Capitol." For although the choice is left to Maevius as to whether he will
ascend to the Capitol or not, and therefore cause the legacy to be payable to
Titius, still, a legacy cannot be legally bequeathed in these terms, namely, "I
give ten aureito Titius if Maevius should consent," as a legacy cannot be made
dependent upon the will of another; hence it has been said that testamentary
provisions specifically stated cause injury, but those expressed in general
terms do not.
53. The Same, On Inventions.
Where anyone directs a slave to be free if he renders accounts to the heir, and
he should afterwards forbid him to do so; he grants him his freedom as it were,
absolutely, and he will be entitled to it by virtue of the will.
54. Javolenus, On Cassius, Book II.
Where anyone orders legacies, for the payment of which he does not fix any
time, to be paid in one, two and three years, and bequeaths a sum of money to a
minor when he shall arrive at the age of puberty, it is stated in the
Commentaries of Gaius that the last legacy mentioned should be paid in one, two
or three years after the boy arrives at puberty; because a more important
condition than the term of payment is attached to the legacy.
I think that the opposite opinion is correct, because where a time is
prescribed, it has reference to the postponement of the payment of legacies
which are due at present, but does not apply to those which are payable in the
future, and the age of puberty establishes a certain date for the payment of
the legacy.
(1) The same property was bequeathed to two persons, if they should pay a
hundred aureito the heir. If one of them should pay him fifty, he will be
entitled to his share of the legacy, and the share of the one who did not pay
will accrue to the other, dependent upon compliance with the condition.
55. The Same, Epistles, Book XIII.
An estate was left to Maevius if he paid two hundred aureito Callimacus, who
could not take anything under a will, and the legatee was, nevertheless,
obliged to comply with the condition and to pay the two hundred aurei,in order
to become entitled to the land which was devised to him, even though he did not
transfer the ownership of the said sum to the person who received it. For what
difference does it make whether anyone is directed to pay the money to such a
person, or to deposit it in some place, or to throw it into the sea? Money
cannot come into the hands of an individual of this kind under the terms of a
will, but he can acquire it as a donation mortis causa.
56. The Same, Epistles, Book XIV.
Where an estate is left to anyone on condition of his paying ten aurei,the
devisee cannot obtain any portion of the land without paying the entire amount.
The case, however, is different where the identical property is left to two
persons under the same condition, for in this instance, under the terms of the
will, the condition imposed upon the different parties may appear to have been
divided among them separately, and therefore they can, as individuals, comply
with it in proportion to their respective shares, and receive the legacy.
For although the entire sum, on the payment of which the legacy is dependent,
seems to be divided by the enumeration of the different persons, the condition
cannot be divided where some accidental occurrence takes place, in the case
where the legacy is left to one person conditionally, and the entire number of
those who are substituted for the legatee should be considered as constituting
but one individual.
57. Pomponius, On Quintus Mucius, Book IX.
Where a slave was directed "to perform five acts for a stranger and become
free," the question arose whether the condition should be
understood to mean the same as where the payment of a sum of money had been
directed, so that, instead of its delivery we can specify the performance of
labor. This is our present practice, just as when it is provided that if a
slave should pay a stranger a certain sum of money out of his peculiumhe shall
be liberated, so, if he furnishes the labor, he must also be granted his
freedom. Therefore, in the case stated, the heir will act wisely if he prevents
his slave from performing the labor, lor, by doing so, the slave will obtain
his freedom, but the stranger will not get the benefit of his services.
58. The Same, On Various Passages, Book X.
Where a legacy is left to a female slave belonging to another, "provided she
should marry," Proculus says that the legacy is valid, because she can marry
after having been manumitted.
59. Ulpianus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book XIII.
A legacy becomes of no effect, if the person to whom it was bequeathed
conditionally should die before the condition is fulfilled.
(1) But what if he should not die, but should lose his civil rights? For
instance, where a bequest was made to a certain man, "if he should become
Consul," and he is deported to an island, will the.legacy not be extinguished
in the meantime, because he can be restored to his civil rights ? I think that
this is extremely probable.
(2) The same rule cannot be said to apply where a penalty involving servitude
is imposed upon him, because servitude resembles death.
60. Paulus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book VII.
Conditions relating to acts are of different kinds, and are susceptible, as it
were, of a threefold division, that is to say where something must be given, or
something must be done, or something must occur; or, on the other hand, where
something must not be given, or not be done, or not occur. The conditions of
giving something or of performing some act have reference either to those to
whom a bequest was made, or to others; the third class depends upon some event
taking place.
(1)The Treasury is obliged to comply witli the same conditions by which the
person from whom the Treasury obtained possession of the property was bound;
just as it can also claim the property which is the subject of the legacy, with
any burdens attaching to the same.
61. Ulpianus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book VIII.
Where a man leaves a legacy to his wife payable at the time that she has
children, some doubt may arise whether the testator only had reference to such
children as might be born after his death, or whether he had in his mind those
also who were born to him after his will was made, if he died while the
marriage continued to exist.
I think it is but proper that this should apply not only to children born
during the lifetime of the husband, but also to those born after his death.
62. Terentius Clemens, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book IV.
Children born to a woman by another person after the decease of her husband
will still be allowed to receive a legacy, if the testator expressly stated
that this should be the case.
(1) Where a bequest was made of more than the law allowed to a certain person
who could not receive the entire amount, "if he should pay something to the
heir," the question arose whether what he gave for the purpose of complying
with the condition could be acquired by virtue of the legacy, for the reason
that he did not receive what he paid to the heir; or whether what he paid
should be considered in excess of the legacy, and therefore that he will not be
entitled to any more of the estate of the testator than he would have been if
the legacy had been bequeathed unconditionally.
Julianus very properly thinks that he will be entitled to as much more of the
legacy as he may have paid for the purpose of complying with the condition, nor
does it make any difference whether he was directed to make payment to the
heir, or to a stranger; because after the calculation, which he is always
obliged to make, is completed, no more will remain for him than the share
authorized by the law.
(2) Where a man bequeaths an annual legacy to his wife under the condition that
she shall not marry as long as she has children; what is the rule of law?
Julianus answers that the woman can marry and take the legacy. If, however, the
testator provided that she should not marry as long as her children were under
the age of puberty, the rule would not apply; because the duty of caring for
the children, rather than remaining in the state of widowhood, was enjoined by
the testator.
63. Gaius, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book II.
Where a legacy was bequeathed as follows, "If she should not marry Titius," or,
"If she should marry neither Titius, Seius, nor Maevius,"
and finally a large number of persons were included in the prohibition, it was
held to be the better opinion that the woman would lose her legacy if she
married any one of them; for it does not appear that widowhood was imposed by
such a condition, because she could very easily marry someone else.
(1) Let us see what would be the case if a legacy was bequeathed to a woman
under the condition that she married Titius. And, indeed, if she could marry
Titius honorably, there can be no doubt that she would be excluded from the
legacy, unless she complied with the condition. If, however, the said Titius
was unworthy of contracting marriage with her, it must be said that she can
marry anyone that she pleases, by the beneficent provision of the law. For when
she was ordered to marry Titius, she was forbidden to marry anyone else, and
therefore, if Titius is unworthy of her, the provision is the same as if it had
been stated in general terms, "If she should not marry." And, moreover, if she
entertains a genuine affection, this condition is harder than the one, "If she
should not marry," for she is forbidden to marry anyone else but Titius, with
whom her marriage would be dishonorable.
64. Terentius Clemens, On the Lex Julia et Papist, Book V.
Where a legacy is bequeathed under the following condition, "If she should not
marry Lucius Titius," Julianus says that the law will not apply.
(1) If, however, the testator had said, "If he should not marry Aricia," it
should be ascertained whether a fraud on the law has not been perpetrated; for
if the said Aricia was a woman who could not easily find another man to marry,
it should be held that what the testator had said for the purpose of evasion
became void by operation of law, for a law which is beneficial to the State and
which has been enacted for the purpose of increasing the population should be
aided by a favorable interpretation.
65. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LXII.
Where a legacy is bequeathed under a condition, and the heir who is charged
with it dies while the condition is pending, he will leave his own heir charged
with the legacy.
66. Modestinus, Opinions, Book X.
An heir manumitted a slave whom he was ordered to set free on the fulfillment
of a condition, and who was also made the beneficiary of a trust. I ask whether
the heir was obliged to pay him what was left him under the trust. Herennius
Modestinus answered that, although the heir had manumitted the slave
absolutely, he must, nevertheless, pay him what he was entitled to by virtue of
the trust which had been left to him under the same conditions, provided that
the slave could show that the conditions had been complied with, or that it was
the fault of the heir that this had not been done.
67. Javolenus, Epistles, Book VII.
Where land was devised to a certain person under the following condition, "If
he should not manumit his slave," and, if he did manumit him, that the devise
of the land should pass to Maevius, the legatee furnished security not to free
the slave, received the bequest, and afterwards emancipated him. I ask whether
anything is due to Maevius.
The answer was that if the bequest had been as follows, "If he should not
manumit his slave," and security was furnished, the party could receive the
legacy from the heir, and if he afterwards manumitted the slave, the agreement,
having become operative, he must either deliver the land to the heir, or pay
him its value, and in this instance the heir must give it to him to whom the
legacy was due under this condition.
68. The Same, On Cassius, Book II.
Where a legacy is bequeathed to take effect when a woman marries, if she was
already married and the testator was aware of the fact, the parties must wait
for a second marriage, and it will make no difference whether the woman marries
again during the lifetime of the testator or after his death.
69. Gaius, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book XIII.
If the testator expressed himself as follows, "I give and bequeath to Titius
such-and-such property, if he is willing," Proculus, on Labeo, remarks that the
legacy will not belong to the heir of the legatee, unless the legatee himself
desired him to have it, because the condition appears to be attached to the
person.
70. Papinianus, Questions, Book XVI.
Amother appointed her two children heirs to certain shares of her estate under
the condition that they should be emancipated, and left them absolutely
bequests of certain articles as preferred legacies. They entered upon the
estate. Their father should be excluded from the benefit of the legacies,
because by emancipating his children in compliance with her wishes, he desired
that the last will of his wife should be observed.
71. The Same, Questions, Book XVII.
A hundred aureiwere bequeathed to Titius, in order that he might purchase a
tract of land. Sextus Caecilius thinks that Titius should not be compelled to
give security, because, in any event, the entire benefit of the legacy would
accrue to him. If, however, the testator intended to benefit the son of his
brother, whom he had reared, and who was hardly capable of transacting
business, it must be held that the heir was interested, and therefore security
should be furnished that the land would be purchased, and would not afterwards
be alienated.
(1) A hundred aureiwere left to Titius, under the condition that "he would
marry Maevia who is a widow." In this instance, the legatee cannot be released
from compliance with the condition, and hence he will not be excused from
giving security. This opinion cannot be successfully opposed, for if anyone
should promise to pay the money to Titius if he should not marry Maevia, the
Praetor will refuse him an action; for it is one thing for a man to be deprived
of the freedom of marriage through fear of a penalty, and another to be induced
to contract matrimony under a certain condition.
(2) A hundred aureiwere bequeathed to Titius, under the condition, "That he
will not leave my monument," or "Or that he will always reside in such-and-such
a city." It can be said that there is no ground for demanding security by which
the right of liberty may be infringed.
We make use of a different rule with reference to the freedman of a deceased
person.
(3) "Let my heir give to my son-in-law Titius a hundred aureiby way of dowry
for my daughter Seia." The benefit of the legacy will belong to Seia because
she begins to have a dowry; but as the testator seemed to have had in his mind
not only the woman, but also Titius to whom he bequeathed a sum of money, it is
proper that he himself should be understood to be the legatee, and therefore be
able to claim the legacy. If the heir should pay the money through the son-in-
law, after a divorce had taken place, he will also be released, as the payment
was converted into the dowry. Payment can legally be made to Titius during the
existence of the marriage, even if the woman should forbid this to be done, for
it is to her interest that she should begin to be endowed. And if anyone should
say that she herself is entitled to a right of action and can bring suit to
recover the money, and does not wish it to constitute her dowry, there is no
doubt that she can be barred by an exception on the ground of bad faith. If
Titius or the woman should die before contracting marriage, the legacy will
belong to the heir.
If Titius should not be willing to marry the woman, the legacy will be valid so
far as she is personally concerned, but if Titius should claim it, he can be
barred by an exception on the ground of bad faith. Sabinus was of the opinion
that if the woman was married to Titius, the legacy would be due without any
security, as the money would become her dowry. Security for payment, however,
would be necessary before marriage, because the legacy, being absolute, can be
demanded. But if the husband should lose his case through his own fault, and
should prove to be insolvent, ought the woman to be entitled to relief against
the heir for the money which was intended as her dowry, where she was not at
all to blame? As both husband and wife have rights of action in this case, the
woman will retain hers if the legacy is not paid to her husband.
72. The Same, Questions, Book XVIII.
Where a legacy is left as follows, "I bequeath to Titia, if she does not
abandon her children," authorities deny that she can be legally required to
give security, because the condition can be fulfilled even if the children
should die. This opinion was not adopted, however, for an ominous
interpretation of this kind should not be opposed to the desire of the mother,
and compel her to give security.
(1) Where a patron bequeathed a certain sum of money to his freedman on
condition that he would not abandon his children, the Emperor permitted a kind
of Mucian bond to be given, because it would be both dangerous and distressing
for a freedman who was intimately associated with the children of his patron to
anticipate their death.
(2) Titius charged the heir whom he had appointed to deliver to another his
estate at the time of his death, if security was not demanded by the
beneficiary of the trust. The beneficiary cannot require a Mucian bond to be
filed before releasing the heir from giving security, since the condition can
be complied with during the lifetime of the party to whom the legacy was
bequeathed.
(3) What should be done if the following clause was inserted in the will, "I
wish you, after my death, to deliver my estate to So-and-So, in such a way that
no bond for the execution of the trust, nor any account will be required of
you?" From these words it will undoubtedly appear that the condition of giving
bond will not be required, and a certain degree of indulgence may be exercised
in demanding an account, that is, so far as negligence is concerned; but the
heir will not be excused from presenting one where fraud has been committed.
A rescript on this point was issued with reference to a certain person who had
transacted the business of the testator, and by the will of the latter had not
been required to render an account.
(4) "If Seia should marry with the approval of Titius, let my heir give her
such-and-such a tract of land." If Seia should marry during the lifetime of
Titius, and he granted his consent, it should be held that she could receive
the legacy; for it is the spirit of the law that nothing shall be done in any
way to interfere with marriage. If, however, Titius should die during the
lifetime of the testator, relief must be granted to the woman, even though the
condition has failed, because, being in suspense, it would be of no force or
effect.
(5) "I bequeath to Maevia, at her death, such-and-such a tract of land, if she
should not marry." It can be said that even if she should marry, she will
immediately be entitled to the legacy. This, however, would not apply, if a
certain date, or any other indefinite time, should be fixed for the payment of
the legacy.
(6) It is more equitable to hold that a false motive should not interfere with
the payment of a legacy, for the reason that the cause of bequeathing it is not
included in the legacy. Generally, however, an exception on the ground of bad
faith will be available, if it should be proved that the testator would not
otherwise have made the bequest.
(7) Cassius and Caslius-Sabinus say that a false condition can be classed as
impossible; as, for instance, "Let Pamphilus be free if he pays Titius what I
owe him," provided nothing was due to Titius. If, however, after the execution
of the will, the testator should pay him what he owed him, the condition will
be understood to have failed.
(8) Sabinus gives it as his opinion that the false designation of a legacy does
not constitute one, for example, where a testator who had left nothing to
Titius inserted the following provision in his will: "Let my heir pay Seius
fifty aureiout of the hundred which I have bequeathed to Titius." Sabinus came
to this conclusion after consideration of the will of the deceased who made
this provision, not with the intention of making a bequest, but for the purpose
of diminishing one which he thought he had already made. Seius, however, cannot
obtain any greater legacy on account of the false designation than if it had
actually been true.
73. The Same, Questions, Book XIX.
A certain tract of land was left to Titius, "If he should not go into Asia,"
and, if he should go there it was left to Sempronius. As in the case of all
conditions which are terminated by the death of the legatees, it was decided
that a Mucian bond must be furnished, and the heir received a bond from Titius,
and transferred the land to him. If he should afterwards go to Asia, suit can
be brought against the heir to compel him, by a praetorian action, to pay to
Sempronius what he could recover under the stipulation secured by the bond
which had been given. If the bond, which had been taken with all due caution,
should in the meantime become worthless, the heir will not be required to make
good the amount out of his own property; but as he can
in no way be blamed, it will be sufficient for him to assign his rights of
action. If, however, Titius should go into Asia, and Sempronius should die
before receiving the legacy, the rights of the deceased will pass to his heir.
74. The Same, Questions, Book XXXII.
The usufruct of certain property was bequeathed to the wife of the testator and
to Titius, provided the woman did not marry. If she should marry, as long as
Titius lived and remained in the same civil condition, she would be entitled to
half of the usufruct, for it should be understood that, under the law, she
would be entitled to as much by virtue of the legacy as she would have been if
she had complied with the condition; and if Titius, with reference to whom the
condition actually failed, should reject the legacy, the woman will obtain no
advantage.
75. The Same, Questions, Book XXXIV.
An uncertain date mentioned in a will imposes a condition.
76. The Same, Opinions, Book VI.
Where a trust has been left to be executed by children, "If any of them should
die without issue," it will not be invalidated by the legal fiction of
adoption.
77. The Same, Opinions, Book VII.
A grandmother who had appointed her grandson heir to a certain portion of her
estate, on condition that he should be emancipated, afterwards inserted the
following in a codicil, "I also devise such-and-such lands to my grandson, in
addition to what I have already left him as my heir." It was held that the
condition of emancipation was repeated, although the grandmother had made no
substitution either with reference to the legacies, or the estate. For indeed
where a slave was bequeathed his freedom absolutely, but was appointed an heir
under a certain condition, and if he should not be the heir, he was directed to
receive a legacy, the Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that his grant of
freedom should be considered as repeated in the legacy.
(1) The Mucian bond does not apply, if payment of the legacy is deferred by
some other condition.
(2) "Let my heir pay a hundred aureito Titius, if my wife does not marry
again." Titius was charged to pay the money to the same woman under the terms
of a trust. If the woman should marry, she can demand the execution of the
trust on the day when the legacy is payable; and if she is excluded from the
benefit of trust, the legatee will not be entitled to security such as the
Mucian bond.
(3) A father appointed guardians for his daughter whom he had disinherited, and
directed them to begin to transact the business of their ward, if her mother
should die before the girl reached the age of puberty; and he charged his wife,
at her death, to pay to their common daughter a million sesterces.The guardians
are not considered to have been appointed under a condition, so that, if, in
the meantime,
the girl should have acquired any other property, they will not be prevented
from administering it. The bond to be executed for the performance of the trust
was not required of the mother, and that to be exacted from the heirs to secure
the payment of the legacies, or the execution of the trust, can be remitted by
any indication whatsoever of the wish of the deceased. Therefore, if the
condition not to demand a bond is prescribed in the case of a legacy or a
trust, this fact does not render them conditional; for if any of the parties
should desire a bond to be furnished, and one is not executed, the condition
will not fail, for, at present, under the public law, the heir cannot be
compelled to furnish a bond against his will, after it has been decided that he
can be excused from giving one.
78. The Same, Opinions, Book IX.
Where a ward or a guardian prevents compliance with a condition which has
reference to the person of the former, whether a legacy or a grant of freedom
is concerned, the condition is considered by the Common Law to have been
fulfilled.
(1) Where two conditions have been prescribed in different ways, it will not
affect the legacy if one of them should fail, and the other should afterwards
be fulfilled. For it makes no difference whether the conditions imposed could
be performed by the party entitled to the legacy, or were dependent upon some
event taking place.
79. The Same, Definitions, Book I.
"Let my heir pay Titius a hundred aureiat the time of the latter's death." The
legacy is absolute for the reason that it is not dependent upon the condition,
but upon delay; for a condition cannot exist under such circumstances.
(1) "Let my heir, when he dies, pay Titius a hundred aurei."This legacy is
bequeathed under a condition. For although it is certain that the heir will
die, it is, nevertheless, uncertain whether the time for the payment of the
legacy will arrive during the life of the legatee, and it is not certain that
he will receive it.
(2) Where anyone receives a legacy after having furnished a Mucian bond, and
does something contrary to the terms of the bond, and the stipulation becomes
operative, he must also restore the profits of the property to the heir. In
this instance the legatee should be compelled to give security from the
beginning.
(3) Although an usufruct to take effect at the time of the death of the
legatee, when bequeathed in this way is void, still, the remedy of the Mucian
bond will be available where the usufruct of property is bequeathed to anyone
under the condition that he will not perform
some act.
(4) Anything which is done to evade the law by preventing marriage has no force
or effect, as for example, "Let my heir pay Titius a hundred aureiif his
daughter, whom he has under his control, does not marry," or "Let my heir pay
the said sum to such-and-such a son under paternal control, if his father does
not marry."
80. Scaevola, Questions, Book VIII.
Reasons which immediately exclude the party from taking action must not be
considered conditional with reference to trusts, but we can only consider those
as such which cause delay with expense, where the legatee can receive his
bequest after having furnished a bond. For we cannot say that the following
cases are similar, namely, where property is bequeathed, "If the legatee will
erect a monument," and where it is bequeathed, "to enable him to erect a
monument."
81. Paulus, Questions, Book XXI.
Julius Paulus to Numphidius, Greeting. Where the following was provided by a
will: "If Stichus should render his accounts, let him be free, along with his
wife; and let my heir pay him ten aurei;"and Stichus should die before
rendering his accounts, whether they balanced, or he owed something, you. ask
if the woman would become free, and whether we should have the same
understanding with reference to the legacy. Freedom being dependent upon
rendering his accounts, this condition is required of the slave in order to
show the good faith of his administration, as he seems to have been ordered to
account for any balance, in his hands if there was any, and if there was none,
both the parties will be held to be absolutely entitled to their freedom; and
if the slave should die after the estate was entered upon, both having obtained
their freedom, they will also be entitled to the legacy.

If, however, the slave should die with a balance in his hands unaccounted for,
his wife will not be considered to have obtained her freedom, which was
dependent on the same condition which was not fulfilled. It may not, however,
improperly be said, that while Stichus was manumitted under a certain
condition, his wife was absolutely manumitted, and that the same condition did
not apply to her, but was only mentioned through the necessity of designating
their union.
(1) A condition is considered to have been complied with where the party who
will be indebted if it is complied with is responsible for this not being done.
82. Callistratus, Questions, Book II.
Where a slave is directed to be free as follows, "Let my heir be charged with
the delivery of such-and-such a tract of land to my slave, if he renders his
accounts," let us see whether the condition has reference to the grant of
freedom, or to the legacy. And, indeed, if we decide that it only refers to the
grant of freedom, no further consideration is necessary, for the legacy is
absolute, and therefore void. If, however, the condition was imposed on the
legacy, as some authorities very properly hold, it becomes legally payable at
the very moment when the slave obtains his freedom. What then is the meaning of
the words, "If he renders his accounts"? Certain jurists say that it signifies
if he should give a statement of the balance in his hands, just as if there was
no difference between the two conditions, "If he renders
an account of the balance remaining in his hands," or, "If he renders his
accounts." We, however, do not think that the condition only has reference to
payment, or to some act which is to be performed, but that it includes both of
these things, since if the slave should tender the balance of the money in a
bag, he will not be released from liability, as this was not the intention of
the testator, but he wished him to render his accounts in the way in which a
slave usually does so; that is to say, that if he should first show the
accounts to the heir, and then the calculations, in order that it may be
ascertained whether they are correctly or incorrectly made out, and whether the
receipts which have been taken correspond with the statement, or not. In this
way the investigation begins with an act, and finishes with the payment of
money. These words also mean that the heirs can ascertain from the examination
of each item what is contained in the several accounts, for the heir is
understood to have ordered the same thing to be done by his heirs which he
himself would have done if he had been living. For he was certainly not
accustomed to sign accounts, where his slave merely showed him the balance
which was due, but he was accustomed to read them, scrutinize them, and take
exception to them; therefore, where freedom is left to a slave under the
condition, "If he renders his accounts," it has not merely the signification
that he will deliver to his heir all the bonds and documents relating to his
administration, but that he will also pay him any balance remaining in his
hands.
83. Paulus, Opinions, Book XII.
Lucius Titius made a will as follows, "Let Aurelius Claudius, the son of such-
and-such a woman, be my heir, if he proves in court that he is my son." Paulus
gave it as his opinion that the son in question did not appear to have been
appointed under any condition which it was in his power to comply with, and
therefore that the will was of no force or effect.
84. The Same, Opinions, Book XIV.
"I wish ten denariiand their clothing to be given to such-and-such freedmen
every month, for their support, if they reside with my son." The said freedmen
remained in attendance on the son until the latter, having grown up, was
appointed to a command in the army, the result of which was he set out on his
journey, having left some of his freedmen at Rome, and died in camp. The
question arose whether support should be furnished by the heirs of the son.
Paulus was of the opinion that the condition should not be considered to have
failed, so far as the freedmen who continued to reside with the son of the
deceased were concerned, as the son having died, it was not their fault that
they did not continue to reside with him; but if the testator had desired
support to be furnished to those freedmen who resided with his son for the
convenience of the latter, and the freedmen demanded it contrary to the wishes
of the deceased, they should not be heard.
85. Scaevola, Opinions, Book III.
Titia, having appointed her son, who also had children, her heir, charged him
to deliver all her property to his children or grandchildren, whenever they
should claim it, and to do so without any legal controversy. I ask whether, by
these words, "Whenever they shall claim it," a condition appears to have been
imposed upon the trust. The answer was that it does not.
86. Maecianus, Trusts, Book III.
Our Julianus says that where a slave is ordered to pay ten aureiand be free,
and he is manumitted during the lifetime of his owner, he will not be entitled
to the legacy which was left him with his freedom, unless he complies with the
condition under which it was granted. This also applies to a purchaser of the
slave, if he should be sold. It, however, only applies where he could obtain
the legacy unconditionally with his freedom, even though no condition was
imposed on the payment of the legacy; as, for instance, where the legacy was to
vest at the time when he obtained his freedom.
Where, however, his freedom was granted under a condition, and the legacy was
payable at once, the question arises whether the legacy is valid. For, in this
case there is no ground for the application of the Rule of Cato, since, even if
the testator should die immediately after making his will, the legacy will not
be absolutely void, as the condition upon which the freedom of the slave is
dependent may be complied with before the estate is entered upon, and the
manumitted slave be entitled to the legacy, unless he should be appointed a
necessary heir; for, in this instance, the legacy will be absolutely void by
operation of law because the slave received his freedom under a condition.
87. Valens, Trusts, Book I.
The following rule which has been handed down, namely, that where several
conditions have been imposed with reference to grants of freedom, the one which
is the most easily complied with, and, in the case of legacies, the last one,
shall be considered.
88. Gaius, Trusts, Book I.
(That is to say, the one which will be the most convenient for the slave
himself to carry out.)
89. Valens, Trusts, Book I.
This has reference not only to provisions which are often dependent upon
different conditions, but also to dispositions which are at first absolutely
made, and have afterwards become conditional. Therefore, where the heir is
ordered to pay something absolutely, or where the bequest is absolute, and the
same property is subsequently bequeathed under a condition, the last bequest
will be valid. If the property is first left under a condition and afterwards
absolutely, it will be payable immediately. If, however, the legacy is
bequeathed absolutely and the heir is charged or requested to pay it at once
under a
certain condition, it is the same as if the bequest had been made in two
places, so that, if the legatee desires, he can bring suit for its recovery
immediately, or it can be claimed by the heir when the condition has been
fulfilled, unless the legacy has only been mentioned the second time by way of
calling attention to the first, for example, "Let my heir give Stichus to the
party to whom I have bequeathed him, if he does such-and-such a thing," for, in
this instance, the testator is not considered to have made this provision for
the purpose of revoking the bequest, and changing it to a conditional one, and
if the legatee should bring suit to recover the property before the condition
was complied with, an exception on the ground of bad faith will be a bar to
further proceedings.
90. Gaius, Trusts, Book I.
Where freedom is bequeathed to a slave several times by a trust, not the
condition most easy of fulfillment but the last one should be considered, in
order that the final desire of the deceased may have the preference. A Rescript
of the Divine Antoninus confirms this opinion.
91. Maecianus, Trusts, Book II.
The nature of conditions which have reference to the future is threefold; some
relate to the time during which the testator may live, some relate to that
following his decease, and some relate to both, and the date of their
fulfillment may be either certain or indefinite. All these things are
accustomed to be taken into consideration, not only in the case of trusts, but
also with reference to the appointments of heirs, and the bequests of legacies.
For instance, there is no doubt that the following condition, "I bequeath to
Titia, if she should marry me," must be complied with during the lifetime of
the testator; this one, however, "If he should attend my funeral," cannot be
complied with until after his death. The following one, namely, "If she should
marry my son," can be complied with either during the lifetime, or after the
death of the testator. The first and the third of the conditions mentioned
refer to an indefinite time, for the condition will be complied with whenever
the girl marries; but the second condition has reference to a certain time.
92. Ulpianus, Trusts, Book V.
Where a person to whom a legacy was bequeathed is asked to emancipate his
children, should he be compelled to emancipate them? I remember that I said on
this point that the children were excluded from demanding the execution of the
trust; for the Praetor, acting as trustee, does not protect children who desire
emancipation as he does slaves. I am aware that Papinianus also in the Ninth
Book of Opinions stated that a father should not be compelled to emancipate his
children.
I think, however, that an extraordinary rule should be established in such
cases, and that a father should be forced to emancipate his children when he
has received property which was left to him with
the understanding that he would emancipate them, for the intentions of
testators should not be evaded. Hence this should be understood in the same way
as where a legacy was bequeathed to him on condition of his emancipating his
children, to enable him to emancipate them. The rule stated by the Divine
Severus in a Rescript, agrees with this; for when a certain woman appointed her
grandchildren her heirs, and appointed her son, their father, their co-heir1,
and substituted them for one another, requesting her son that he should
emancipate her children, but did not ask him to transfer the estate to them, he
was compelled by the authority of the Divine Severus to emancipate them, and to
deliver the estate to them, and it was added that if he should delay to do
this, he would be liable for interest on the amount unpaid while he was in
default; for it was held that he who was in default in granting their
emancipation was guilty of the same default with reference to the delivery of
the property under the terms of the trust.
93. Papinianus, Opinions, Book VIII.
A mother having appointed her son her heir, and designated the daughters of the
latter as his co-heirs, charged him to emancipate the latter, so that they
might receive a curator from the Praetor. It was held that the son was charged
with a trust to permit his daughter to become independent of his authority, so
that they could obtain the estate of their grandmother, and that it did not
make any difference if he should acquire the shares of his daughters by the
right of substitution.
94. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book I.
Where freedom is bequeathed to a slave on condition that he will pay ten
aureito Titius, who was not the heir, a certain person is designated, and, on
this account, the condition cannot be complied with except with reference to
him. It is clear that, when the day for the payment of the legacy arrives, the
slave who is to be free under a condition will, according to the law which has
been established, be entitled to the money dependent upon said condition, and
will gain his freedom without payment to anyone.
The case of a legatee is different, and the condition with reference to him is
considered to have failed if Titius should die before the legatee has paid the
money.
(1) Where a condition is expressed in the following terms, "Let So-and-So, a
slave, be free, if he pays ten aureito the heir," or "Or if he pays ten aureito
Titius, the heir," he will obtain his freedom if he pays the money not only to
the heir, but to the heir of the latter. But if there should be no successor to
the heir he will, according to the established law, obtain his freedom without
payment to anyone.
1 Co-heirs, no matter what their number, were considered but a single person at
Civil Law. "Plures cohaeredes sunt quasi unum corpus, propter unitatem juris
quod habent." ---ED.
95. The Same, Epitomes of Law, Book IV.
Where a legacy bequeathed under a condition is transferred to another, it is
considered to have been transferred under the same condition, if it was not
personal.
96. Paulus, On Neratius, Book I.
The usufruct of a slave was bequeathed to Titius, and freedom was granted to
the slave when it should cease to belong to the legatee. Titius died during the
lifetime of the testator. The grant of freedom was not valid, because the
condition did not have a beginning.
Paulus: Hence, if Titius should live, and should not be able to receive the
legacy, it must be said that the same rule will apply; for anything which did
not have a beginning cannot be held to have ceased to exist.
(1) The usufruct of a slave was bequeathed to a woman as long as she remained
unmarried, and the same slave was directed to be free if she did marry. If the
woman should marry the slave would become free, because a grant of freedom has
more force than a legacy.
97. The Same, On Neratius, Book II.
A legacy was bequeathed to the citizens of a municipality on condition of their
taking an oath. This condition is not an impossible one.
Paulus: How then can it be complied with ? The officials by whom the affairs of
the town are conducted can take the oath for the citizens.
98. The Same, On Neratius, Book III.
My own property can be bequeathed to me under a condition, because, in bequests
of this kind, not the time when the will is executed but the time when the
condition is fulfilled must be considered.
99. Papinianus, Questions, Book XVIII.
Conditions which are not specifically stated in a will, that is to say, such as
seem to have been tacitly included therein, do not render legacies conditional.
100. The Same, Opinions, Book VII.
A testator bequeathed two hundred aureito Titia, if she should not marry, and a
hundred to her if she should. The woman married. She can claim the two hundred
aurei,but not the other hundred; for it would be absurd for her to be
considered a widow and a married woman at the same time.
101. The Same, Opinions, Book VIII.
A father, by his will, designated Severiana Procula, his daughter, as the wife
of Aelius Philippus, one of her relatives. He left a certain estate to his said
daughter in trust if she should marry Aelius Philippus, and if she should not
marry him, he wished the same estate to be given to Philippus. The girl died
before arriving at a marriageable age. I gave it as my opinion that in
conditions mentioned in wills
the intention, rather than the words of the testator, should be considered; and
hence that Aelius Philippus seemed to have been made the beneficiary of a trust
if Procula, the daughter of the deceased, should refuse to marry him.
(1) Where a trust is created as follows, "I wish you to surrender my estate, if
you should die without children," according to the intention of the testator
the condition will fail if only one child should survive the beneficiary of the
trust.
(2) The terms of a condition prescribed by a will are considered only for the
purpose of ascertaining the intention of the testator, and therefore where
testamentary guardians are appointed to administer the affairs of the minor
until he grows up, and the condition of a trust is, "If they should administer
the guardianship until he reaches his eighteenth year," it will not be
considered to have failed to be fulfilled if the guardians should cause
themselves to be appointed his curators.
(3) A mother-in-law left a trust for the benefit of her daughter-in-law, under
the condition, "That she should remain married to my son." A divorce having
been obtained without the fault of the husband after the death of the mother-
in-law, I gave it as my opinion that the condition had failed, that the day for
the execution of the trust did not begin before the death of either the wife or
the husband, and hence that there would be no ground for the Mucian bond
because the condition could be fulfilled during the life of the husband.
(4) Where a monthly and annual allowance was left to a freedman by a trust,
under the condition, "As long as he may transact the business of the daughter
of the patron," the money must be paid, even if the daughter should forbid the
freedman to transact her business; still, if she should change her mind, the
trusts will be restored to their former condition, for the reason that there
are several of them.
102. The Same, Opinions, Book IX.
A grandfather appointed his son and a grandson by another son his heirs, and
requested his grandson if he should die before reaching his thirtieth year, to
deliver his share of the estate to his uncle. The grandson died within the
period above mentioned, leaving children. I gave it as my opinion that, on
account of paternal affection, the condition of the trust failed of
fulfillment, because it should be considered that less had been prescribed than
had been intended.
103. Paulus, Questions, Book IV.
Where a legacy was bequeathed as follows, "Let such-and-such a sum be paid to
Titius, after ten years, if he does not require security from my heirs," and
Titius should die before the term of ten years has elapsed, he will transmit
the legacy to his heir, because the condition was complied with at the time of
his death.
104. The Same, Opinions, Book XIV.
The beneficiary of a trust who was banished after the will was opened and was
afterwards restored to the rights can demand the
execution of the trust, where the condition upon which the same was dependent
was fulfilled after he had recovered his position as a Roman citizen.
105. Pomponius, Epistles, Book V.
Where, while the condition was pending, an heir left to a third party land
devised by the testator under a condition, after the condition imposed by the
first will has been complied with, the ownership of the property will not be
lost by the prior legatee; nor can the heir render any part of the land
religious, or impose a servitude upon the same, and if he does impose a
servitude, it will be extinguished when the condition is fulfilled.
106. Julianus, Digest, Book XXV.
When a legacy is bequeathed under the condition, "If she should not marry
Titius," it must be considered just as if it had been bequeathed after the
death of Titius; and therefore the legatee will be entitled to it without
furnishing the Mucian bond. The woman will have a right to the legacy, even if
she should marry someone else.
107. Gaius, On Events.
It sometimes happens that a legacy bequeathed conditionally may be understood
to be absolute; as where something is left dependent upon the same condition
under which another heir was also appointed. The same rule applies where a
bequest is left under the condition that the heir enters upon the estate.
On the other hand, where a legacy is bequeathed absolutely, it may be held to
have been conditional; as, for example, where the property bequeathed is taken
away under a condition, because it is understood to have been left under an
opposite condition.
108. Scaevola, Digest, Book XIX.
A certain man left a house to all his freedmen, and added the following words,
"In order that my freedmen may always reside in the said house, and that it may
never pass away from persons bearing my name, and may belong to the last
survivor; and, in addition to this I wish the Sosian Estate be given to my said
freedmen." The question arose whether the condition, "That it may never pass
away from persons bearing my name," was also applicable to the second bequest.
The answer was that it did apply to it.
109. The Same, Digest, Book XX.
An heir, having been charged by the testator to accept a hundred sesterces,and
surrender his share of the estate to Titia, his co-heir, died after entering
upon the estate; and Titia also died before paying the hundred sesterces.The
question arose whether the heir of Titia, by tendering a hundred
sesterces,could, under the terms of the trust, obtain her share of the estate.
The answer was that the heir could not comply with the condition.
Claudius: The opinion of Scaevola is stated with a great deal of ability, where
the law is clear; but, still, some doubt may arise whether in the present
instance a condition was not imposed.
110. Pomponius, Epistles, Book IX.
A slave who is to be liberated on condition of paying a certain sum of money to
Titius will become free if he pays the money out of his peculium,even without
the consent of the heirs; but if Titius knowingly accepts the money against the
consent of the heirs, he will only be considered to hold it as the possessor,
and not the owner, and the heirs, who were unwilling that it should have been
paid, can deprive him of it.
111. The Same, Epistles, Book XL
A slave who is ordered to be free under the condition of rendering his accounts
must show that he has been honest in all the business transacted by him, and
that he has not embezzled anything of what he received, and has not included in
his accounts any expenses which he did not incur. He must also pay over
whatever his accounts show remains in his hands by way of balance, for he
cannot become free unless he, in this way, complies with the condition under
which freedom was granted to him.
He will not, however, be obliged to prove that the solvency of the debtors with
whom he made contracts existed at the time of the death of his master, but that
when he lent them money, their credit was such as would have induced the
diligent head of a family to trust them.
112. The Same, Letters, Book XII.
Conditions like the following, "If they should erect a monument," if imposed
upon several persons, cannot be complied with unless by all of them at the same
time.
(1) Likewise, "If Titius should pay to Symphorus and Januarius a hundred
aurei,I leave him such-and-such a tract of land." If Symphorus dies, will the
devise be extinguished? I think that it ought to be interpreted in this way, if
the legatee should pay the amount during the lifetime of either of the parties.
According to the most indulgent interpretation, it must be said that, if
Symphorus should die without Titius being in default, he could claim half of
the land which was devised, if he tendered half the money to Januarius.
(2) A question arose with reference to the following case: A tract of land was
devised to certain persons, if they paid a specified sum of money for funeral
expenses, and for transporting the body into another province; for unless both
of them made the payment, neither would be entitled to the devise, as the
condition could not be complied with unless by both. We, however, are
accustomed to make a more liberal interpretation in cases of this kind, just as
where a tract of land is devised to two persons if they pay ten aurei,and one
of them pays his share, he will be entitled to his portion of the devise.
(3) Priscus gives it as his opinion that a slave who is to become free on
condition of rendering an account, cannot do this where the testator died, or
where he himself may happen to be, or where he may desire to render it; but, in
the meantime, he must present himself to the person to whom he is obliged to
render the account, and by all means, if the latter should be absent on
business for the State.
It is, however, extremely probable that another conclusion might be arrived at
in a case of this kind, where the rank of the parties and the distance of the
places must be taken into consideration.
113. Paulus, From the Second Book of the Collection of Imperial Decisions in
Matters Brought Before the Emperors; Embraced in Six Books.
Where a son was charged by his father, "To deliver his estate to Titius, if he
should die before he himself could administer his affairs," and the son died
after reaching the twentieth year, it was stated in a Rescript that the trust
must be executed.







THE DIGEST OR PANDECTS.
(Continued.) BOOK XXXV.
(Continued.)
TITLE II. CONCERNING THE FALCIDIAN LAW.
1. Paulus, On the Lex Falcidia.
The Falcidian Law, by its first Article, conferred the power of disposing of an
estate up to and including three-fourths of the same, as follows: &quot;Those
Roman citizens who desire to make a will after the enactment of this law shall
have the right and the power to give and bequeath their money and their
property to anyone whom they may select, in accordance with the following
provisions.&quot;
In the second Article, the amount of the legacies which can be bequeathed is
established in the following words: &quot;Any Roman citizen who may execute a
will after the passage of this law shall have the right and the power to
bequeath as large a sum of money as he wishes to any other Roman citizen, in
accordance with public law; provided the legacy is left in such a way that his
heirs will receive not less than a fourth part of his estate under the terms of
the will. Those to whom any money is given or bequeathed shall be entitled to
receive the same without being liable for fraud; and an heir who is ordered and
charged to pay said money must pay it in compliance with the directions
prescribed.&quot;
(1) On account of the Cornelian Law, the Lex Falcidiais also considered to
apply to those who die in the hands of the enemy; for the reason that the
Cornelian Law confirms their wills just as if they had lost their lives in
their own country, by reason of which fiction the Lex Falcidiaand all others
relating to wills which can be considered to have the same application are
included in this category.
(2) The Lex Falcidiadoes not have reference to those who reject an estate left
by a will, in order to obtain possession of it on the ground of intestacy; but
the power of the law can be applied by means of the Edict of the Praetor.
(3) The rule is the same where the condition of taking an oath is remitted.
(4) Where a testator makes a bequest to his slave with the grant of his freedom
this law will apply, because payment of the legacy is postponed until the time
when the slave will become free; and this is also the case where the person to
whom property is left is in the hands of the enemy or has not yet been born.
(5) The Falcidian Law also applies to legacies bequeathed to municipalities, or
even for religious purposes.
(6) Again, it not only applies to bequests of property of the testator, but
also to those of property belonging to others.
(7) Everything which must be paid or delivered out of the estate of the
deceased is subject to the provisions of this law, whether it is certain or
uncertain, and whether it is to be weighed, counted, or measured; and the law
also applies where the right of property is bequeathed, as, for instance, the
usufruct, or any claim which may be due.
(8) Likewise, where a legacy is bequeathed as follows, &quot;Let my heir
furnish Seius with provisions, and if he should not do so, let him pay him ten
aurei,&quot;some authorities hold that the legacy is limited to ten aurei,that
the provisions can only be acquired as a donation mortis causa,and that the
heir cannot avail himself of the benefit of the Falcidian Law. When stated that
provisions must be furnished without delay, it should be understood to mean
after a reasonable time. If, however, the heir should furnish them after having
been in default, the legatee will have no right to receive them, and the
Falcidian Law will not apply; for the provisions which were bequeathed have now
been transformed into a pecuniary legacy, and the ten aureiare due.
The rule will be the same if, in the beginning, the bequest had been made as
follows, &quot;If he should not furnish the provisions, let him pay ten
aurei,&quot;for in this instance the provisions are not the object of the
bequest, and if they are furnished they will be acquired mortis causa,since the
condition of the legacy has not been fulfilled.
(9) Where an usufruct is bequeathed, as it can be divided, it is different from
other servitudes which are indivisible; and certain ancient authorities were
accustomed to hold that the entire usufruct should be appraised, and in that
way the amount included in the legacy be determined. Aristo, however, dissents
from this opinion of the ancients, for he says that a fourth part of this can
be reserved, as in the case of corporeal property. Julianus very properly
approves this opinion. But where the services of a slave are bequeathed, as
neither use nor usufruct is considered to be included in a legacy of this kind,
the decision of the ancients must necessarily be adopted, in order that we may
ascertain what is embraced in the legacy; because, necessarily, in all acts
which are to be performed, a part must be deducted to comply with the Falcidian
Law, and part of the labors of a slave cannot be understood to exist. Even if,
in the case of the usufruct, the question should arise to how much the legatee
to whom the usufruct was given will be entitled, and what proportion should be
allotted to the other legatees, in order that the share of the said legatee may
not exceed three-fourths of the estate, recourse must necessarily be had to the
rule of the ancient jurists.
(10) Where anyone bequeaths to his creditor the amount that he owes him, the
legacy will either be void, if no advantage enures to the creditor; or, if he
is benefited by it, for instance, by immediate pay-
ment, the Falcidian Law will also apply with reference to the advantage
obtained by the creditor.
(11) If the legatee has obtained possession of the property bequeathed, and he
cannot be deprived of it because he obtained possession of the same with the
consent of the heir, who gave it while laboring under a mistake, an action will
be granted to the heir to recover everything over and above three-fourths of
the value of said property.
(12) It sometimes becomes absolutely necessary for the entire legacy to be paid
to the legatee, if he enters into a stipulation to return anything which he may
receive above the amount allowed by the Falcidian Law; for example, where a
minor is charged with the payment of legacies which do not exceed the amount
authorized by that law, for there is reason to believe that other legacies may
come to light after the death of the minor, which, after contribution has been
made, will amount to more than three-fourths of the estate.
The same rule may be said to apply where legacies are bequeathed conditionally
under the first will, and it is uncertain whether they will be payable or not;
and therefore if the heir is ready to pay them without application to court, he
can protect his interest by means of the stipulation above mentioned.
(13) The share obtained by an heir through the substitution of his co-heir will
benefit the legatee, for, in this instance, the heir resembles one who has been
appointed absolutely for one part of the estate, and conditionally for another.
Where, however, he refuses to accept the estate, the legacies with which he is
charged will not increase by accrual; for instance, where they are bequeathed
specifically, and not in general terms, as to &quot;Whomever shall be my
heir.&quot;
(14) If the share of my co-heir is exhausted, mine remains unimpaired, and if I
should claim his, Cassius thinks that the two shares ought to be merged.
Proculus, however, holds the contrary. In this case Julianus agrees with
Proculus, which opinion I think to be the more correct one. The Divine
Antoninus, however, is said to have decided that both shares should be united
in computing what is due under the Falcidian Law.
(15) If I should arrogate my co-heir after the estate has been entered upon,
there is no doubt that the shares ought to be separated, just as if I became
the heir of my co-heir.
(16) If a legacy, payable annually, is bequeathed to Titius for the reason that
there are several legacies, and they are conditional, there will be ground for
the furnishing of the bond mentioned in the Edict, in order to secure the
return of any amount received over and above that allowed by the Falcidian Law.
(17) Certain authorities hold that payment of what is naturally due to the
estate and cannot be demanded should not be required, and ought not to be
reckoned as part of the assets. Julianus, however, thinks that these claims
will, according to circumstances, either increase the amount of the estate or
will not increase it, and if paid,
this can be acquired by the heir through hereditary right, and hence would be
included in the distribution of the estate.
(18) Where a debtor becomes the heir of his creditor, although he may be
released from liability by reason of the merger resulting therefrom; still, as
he is considered to have received a larger inheritance on this account, the
amount of his indebtedness must be computed, although it may have been
extinguished by his acquiring the estate.
(19) The question arises whether expenses incurred for the erection of a
monument should be deducted. Sabinus thinks that they should be deducted if it
becomes necessary to erect the monument.
Marcellus, having been consulted as to whether the expenses for a monument
which the testator ordered to be erected should be deducted as part of the
debts of the estate, answered that no more ought to be deducted on this account
than was expended for the funeral. For the case is different with reference to
the expense incurred for the erection of a monument, since it is not necessary,
as that of the funeral and the burial are. Therefore, the person to whom money
is bequeathed for the erection of a monument must suffer the deduction under
the Falcidian Law.
2. Marcellus, Digest, Book XXII.
A larger sum should not be allowed than will be sufficient for the erection of
an ordinary monument.
3. Paulus, On the Falcidian Law.
Where an heir is appointed and sells the estate, which is insolvent, it would
be very difficult to persuade anyone that it was not solvent, since it found a
purchaser. If this is a fact, however, the legatees will not be entitled to
anything, because the heir appears to have profited more from the folly of the
purchaser than from the estate of the deceased.
On the other hand, if he should sell the property of the estate for too low a
price, this will not prejudice the rights of the legatees, and therefore if the
heir has made a good bargain he should enjoy the benefit of it.
(1) If, however, a person who is not solvent should make bequests, and the heir
should agree with the creditors not to pay them in full, and, by reason of this
agreement, be able to retain something from the estate, still, the legatees
will not be entitled to anything, because the heir obtained the money not from
the estate, but through the agreement with the creditors.
(2) Likewise, if a legacy payable annually to a municipality is bequeathed, and
a question arises with reference to the Falcidian Law, Marcellus thinks that
only as much should be considered to have been bequeathed as will amount to a
sum which, at four per cent interest, will provide the annual payments of the
legacy.
4. Papinianus, Questions, Book XVI.
Atract of land having been devised to me under a condition, the heir of the
testator appointed me his heir while the condition of the
legacy was pending, and the condition was subsequently fulfilled. In
considering the application of the Falcidian Law in this case, the land will be
understood to be mine, not by hereditary right, but by virtue of the legacy.
5. The Same, Opinions, Book Vill.
Abequest left to a city by the terms of a legacy or a trust is not valid where
it consists of what must be paid on account of a promise already made.
Therefore, if the testator, by the disposition of his will, exceeded the amount
of what was due, only the excess will be diminished by the Falcidian Law, hence
the creditor cannot be charged with a trust as a legatee. If, Tiowever, the
legacy is dependent upon the arrival of a certain date, or compliance with some
condition, the estimate of the advantage should not be made, but the entire
amount bequeathed can be demanded; and even if the time for payment should
arrive, or the condition should be fulfilled during the lifetime of the
testator, what in the first place was valid will not become void.
6. Venuleius, Stipulations, Book XIII.
If a man should become the heir of his wife, and incur expenses for her
funeral, he will not be considered to have expended the entire amount as her
heir, but he should contribute in proportion to the extent that he is
pecuniarily benefited, after having deducted what was due on account of the
dowry.
7. Papinianus, Questions, Book VII.
In considering the application of the Falcidian Law with reference to the
bequest of a servitude, as a servitude cannot be divided, the legacy of the
same need not be entirely delivered, unless an appraised value of a portion of
the same is tendered.
8. The Same, Questions, Book XIV.
Where one of several heirs is charged to pay a debt of the estate, and the
application of the Falcidian Law is considered, those who have received
bequests shall not take any account of the said debt which the heir alone is to
pay.
9. The Same, Questions, Book XIX.
It was decided with reference to the Falcidian Law that, after the crops which
had matured at the date of the death of the testator have been gathered, they
increase the value of the estate as forming part of the land, which is held to
have been worth more at that time.
(1) No distinction with reference to time is admitted, so far as the unborn
child of a female slave is concerned. This is not unreasonable, because as the
child has not yet come into the world, it cannot properly be called a slave.
10. The Same, Questions, Book XX.
Anything over and above the fourth established by the Falcidian Law which goes
into the hands of the heir, does not bind him beyond
the other three-fourths, so far as the amount of the legacies is concerned; as,
for instance, in the case of the estate of a minor, where he who becomes the
heir of the father of the said minor is substituted for the disinherited son.
11. The Same, Questions, Book XXIX.
In estimating the amount due under the Falcidian Law, any property which has
been retained by the heir at any time is included in the fourth of the estate
to which he is entitled.
(1) Where a slave is to become free under a certain condition, and the
condition is fulfilled at any time whatsoever, the heir will not be held to
have sustained any loss, so far as his fourth interest in said slave is
concerned. If, however, the condition should fail to be fulfilled, an opposite
opinion must be adopted, and the value of the slave should be estimated at what
he was worth at the time of his death.
(2) The Emperor Marcus Antoninus decided that heirs who have been deprived of
their shares of an estate shall not be liable for a larger sum for legacies
than the remainder amounts to.
(3) Where a certain individual was sentenced to be banished after the
confiscation of half his property, and having taken an appeal made a will and
died, and, after his death, his appeal was decided to have been improperly
taken, the question arose whether the half of his estate which had been
forfeited to the Treasury should be considered as a debt, and the remaining
half alone should constitute his estate; or whether it would be necessary to
come to the relief of the heir. It appears that relief should be granted the
heir, as the intention of the testator who took the appeal, and his evident
desire warrant this opinion.
(4) Where a slave manumitted by a will dies before the estate is entered upon,
it is understood that the heir must sustain the loss. But how can his value be
estimated, who, if he had lived, could not be appraised? For those who, at the
time of the death of their master, are attacked by a disease which renders it
certain that they cannot live, and they afterwards die, it has been decided
that the loss must be borne by the estate. Nor is the case different with
respect to those who are under the same roof when the master was killed by his
slaves.
(5) Let us examine what is the effect of the common rule, namely: &quot;But one
Falcidian portion can exist in the will of a father and his minor sons.&quot;
For, although the substitute may have been charged with the distribution of
property left by the minor, when he becomes the heir he will only be liable for
it as an ordinary debt; still, on account of other legacies left by the
pupillary substitution, there will be ground for contribution. Hence it may
happen that the substitute cannot retain anything from the father's estate, or
that he may obtain much more than the fourth to which he is entitled by the
Falcidian Law.
But what if the estate of the minor should not be sufficient to pay the
legacies, while that of the father would have been sufficient to pay those
which he bequeathed? The substitute will certainly be required to employ his
fourth for their payment, as the father made the bequests
out of his own estate, and it makes no difference that payment cannot be
required beyond the assets of the estate by any will; for in this instance, the
legacies left under the pupillary substitution are understood to have been
bequeathed, as it were, conditionally, by the original will.
(6) Where a testator makes a substitution of two persons for his son, and
charges each one with the payment of a legacy, the question arises: can the
substitute personally claim the Falcidian portion which the minor does not
possess, or shall there be but one substitute for the minor? Anyone might (in
conformity to what has been already laid down with reference to the established
rule governing estates), easily say that the'Falcidian Law will not apply, and
that suit can be brought against the other substitute for an amount over and
above his share.
The opposite opinion is, however, the better one, as it should be held that he
has the right to deduct his fourth, just as if he had become the heir of his
father; for as it is from this that the property of the father and the
distribution of the legacies derive their form and origin, so where there are
several substitutes, and the person of the minor is not to be considered,
recourse must be had to the meaning of the appointment.
But what shall we say with reference to the other substitute who was not
charged, so that, if the minor should die before paying the legacies with which
he was burdened, and they amount to more than three-fourths of the estate, will
he be authorized to deduct the Falcidian portion from all of them?
But he still has the fourth, and the same conclusion cannot be arrived at as in
the case of the other appointment. Again, if we deny that this should be done,
it must be held that such a course is contrary to the general rule. Therefore,
a difference exists, as he who was charged in his own name can retain the
fourth just as if he had been appointed an heir, and the other substitute, who
was not charged, although his share may be increased, cannot be sued for the
entire amount, on account of confusion in the estimate.
The result of this is that if security with reference to the Falcidian portion
was furnished to the minor, it will enure to the advantage of both parties;
that is to say, so far as the amount which each one will be able to retain for
himself is concerned.
(7) Where a testator appointed a co-heir with his minor son, the question
arose: in what way should the portion authorized by the Falcidian Law be
ascertained, and what was the meaning of the ordinary rule that it should apply
separately to different legacies? I said that, with reference to any legacies
with which a father charged his son, as well as those with which he charged a
substitute, no separation can be made, as they should be subjected to a common
estimate and both must contribute in turn; but where legacies with the payment
of which a foreign heir is charged are bequeathed, they cannot be mingled with
the others, and therefore the substitute will be entitled to a fourth of the
share which was given to the minor, although he may be entitled to his own
share as the appointed heir.
Another rule, however, is applicable where an heir is appointed to different
portions of an estate; for in this instance the legacies will be merged not
less than if he had been appointed but once to one share which is composed of
several; and it does not make any difference whether he was appointed heir to
the several shares absolutely, or under different conditions.
(8) Where anyone substitutes an heir who has been appointed instead of his
disinherited son, and charges him with the payment of a legacy by the second
will, the legacies are necessarily merged; and therefore Julianus says that
those with the payment of which the substitute was charged are valid, because
he is the heir of the father.
12. The Same, Questions, Book XXX.
Where a debtor, who has appointed his creditor his heir, requests that, in
estimating the sum reserved by the Falcidian Law, his obligation should not be
included with the bequests to the legatees, there is no doubt that the will of
the deceased can be sustained in court by filing an exception on the ground of
fraud, when the amount due under the Falcidian Law is to be determined.
13. The Same, Questions, Book XXXVII.
Where a slave undertakes the execution of an implied trust under the direction
of his master, it has been decided that, because he was obliged to obey his
master, he will be entitled to the benefit of the Falcidian Law.
14. The Same, Opinions, Book IX.
Afather appointed his daughter, who was separated from her husband, heir to a
portion of his estate, and charged her to deliver to her brother and co-heir
the share of it which she had received, after having deducted the sixth part of
the same. In determining the amount to be reserved under the Falcidian Law,
would the dowry be liable to contribution? If the father, with the consent of
his daughter, did not claim her dowry, I gave it as my opinion that she would
be entitled to the Falcidian portion by hereditary right, but she would be
entitled to the dowry in her own right, because it should not be included in
her father's estate.
(1) A grandmother, having appointed her grandchildren her heirs, charged some
of them, without having deducted the amount to which they were entitled to by
the Falcidian Law under another will, to pay the entire legacy to their
brothers and co-heirs.
I gave it as my opinion that the trust was legally created, but that the amount
with which it was charged would also be liable to contribution.
(2) It is not proper, where a substitute was appointed for two minors under the
age of puberty, and became the heir to both, that the Falcidian Law should
apply to the estate of only one of them; if, out of the property of the other
minor, he should retain the fourth part of the estate of the father which
passed to his children.
(3) If, however, one brother, who is legitimate, should become the heir to the
other, and be substituted for the survivor, the share of the father's estate
which the surviving son receives on the ground of intestacy will not be subject
to contribution to the Falcidian portion, but the substitute can only retain
the fourth part of what the minor who had a substitute acquired.
15. The Same, Opinions, Book XIII.
Where a debt has been remitted by an agreement mortis causa,the debtor must
contribute to the amount due under the Falcidian Law, and this can be retained
by the heir by filing a replication in factum.
(1) Where a brother appointed his sister his heir, and charged her with a
donation which he wished to give to another, who stipulated with her that she
would not take advantage of the Falcidian Law, and if she did so, that she
would pay him a certain sum of money, as it has been well established that the
laws cannot be violated by any agreement entered into by private individuals,
the sister will be entitled by public law to retain the Falcidian portion, and
an action based on the stipulation will be refused to the other party.
(2) Where annual legacies have been bequeathed, it has been decided that an
heir will, none the less, be permitted to retain the Falcidian portion, because
during the first and second years he paid the legatee without making any
deduction.
(3) Where a grandfather was indebted to his grandson on account of his
administration of his guardianship, and the latter afterwards became the sole
heir of his grandfather, if the Falcidian Law should be applicable, it was held
that the amount, along with the other debts, must be deducted from the assets
of the estate. It makes no difference whether the grandfather, who was also the
guardian, charged his heir, if he should die before reaching a certain age
without having any children, to deliver the estate, as well as his own property
to a third party; for it was not held that the estate should be set off against
this debt, and it was practically admitted that such a set-off ought not to be
made, as the deceased indicated that his heir should have his own property.
It is clear that if the condition of the trust was complied with, and the
profits of the estate collected after the death of the grandfather, they should
be set off against an equal sum of the money due to the guardianship; but the
heir would only be entitled to retain the fourth part of the property of the
grandson, which the grandfather left him at his death.
(4) Where a father was charged with a trust for the benefit of his son, by the
will of the mother of the latter, which trust he had not executed, he wished a
set-off against it to be made of the estate which he left to his son. If a
calculation was made to determine the amount due under the Falcidian Law, what
the son was entitled to should be set off against the fourth which he had
actually obtained from his
father's estate, and he could only deduct the excess of the three-fourths of
what was owing to the heirs.
(5) Whatever the heir is compelled to deliver to a husband out of donations
made by him to his wife shall not be counted as part of her estate; as the
woman, so far from becoming more wealthy, is considered to have become poorer
to that extent. Again, when any diminution of the donations for which the heir
is responsible takes place, the loss will not be borne by the husband.
(6) In fixing the amount due under the Falcidian Law, the heir cannot be
compelled to give a receipt for the crops of land left conditionally under the
terms of a trust; and where he has not been charged to deliver the crops to the
beneficiary of the trust, he will be entitled to a fourth, and the profits of
the fourth of the property of the deceased which belonged to him at the time of
his death. Nor does it make any difference when the Falcidian Law begins to be
operative, for although it will commence to apply to the trust immediately
after the conditions have been fulfilled; still, the profits of the fourth must
be left in possession of the heir from the time of the death of the testator.
(7) Where a son appointed his mother his heir, and bequeathed her, under a
trust, a sum to make up the deficiency of what he should have left her, but did
not do so; what was left to her can be diminished by the amount of the
Falcidian portion, and the mother can receive the money left her in excess of
the quarter of the share.
(8) In calculating the fourth to be reserved under the Falcidian Law, the
amount cannot be diminished by the estimate made by the testator, any more than
the heir can be entirely deprived of it.
16. Scsevola, Questions, Book III.
If an heir should deliver only certain articles out of several which have been
bequeathed, he can retain the entire Falcidian portion out of the remainder,
and can interpose an exception on the ground of bad faith against the legatee,
even with reference to the property which he has already delivered.
(1) If only one article has been bequeathed, and a part of the same has been
delivered, the heir can reserve the entire Falcidian portion out of the
remainder.
17. The Same, Questions, Book VI.
If a soldier should make a codicil, and die within a year after his discharge,
the legacies bequeathed by his military will, in accordance with military law,
must be fully paid, but it is held that those left by his codicil must be paid
after the Falcidian portion has been deducted. This matter should be explained
as follows: If the testator has four hundred aureiand bequeaths four hundred by
his will, and a hundred by his codicil, out of the fifth part (that is to say
eighty, which the legatee would be entitled to by the codicil if it was not
subject to the Falcidian Law), the heir will be entitled to retain a fourth,
that is to say twenty aurei.
18. Paulus, Questions, Book XL
A son under paternal control who had served in the army, at his death, charged
his father to give Titius his peculium castrense.
The question arose whether the heir could deduct a fourth of it. I said that
the Falcidian Law, as interpreted by the Divine Pius, also included the
successions of intestates where there had been trusts created; but in the case
stated the peculiumwas not a part of the estate although I would hold that
where a foreign heir was appointed it would become a portion of the estate by
his entering upon the same. For when the peculiumremains in the hands of the
father, his ancient right continues to exist, and the property is still
peculium.Nor is this contrary by the fact that the Falcidian Law applies to the
wills of those who die in the hands of the enemy, since the fiction of the
Cornelian Law creates both the estate and the heir.
However, I do not doubt that the father ought also to enjoy the benefit of the
law; for if, indeed, he is required to surrender the property as having
belonged to the head of the family, the appointed heir, having failed to enter
upon the estate under the will, can be sued by the legatees in conformity with
the terms of the Edict.
(1) The consequence of this is that if the father should, in the meantime,
obtain the fourth and the profits of the same, we can apply the Trebellian
Decree of the Senate, and equitable actions can be brought in order that the
property may become a part of the estate after restitution has been made.
19. Scsevola, Questions, Book Vill.
Where an heir is charged to sell a tract of land for five aurei,which is worth
ten, there is no doubt that the five aureiwill be subject to the operation of
the Falcidian Law.
20. The Same, Questions, Book IX.
If my slave, after having been appointed my heir, is charged with a legacy for
my benefit, and acquires an estate for me, Msecianus denies that the legacy
should be subject to the Falcidian Law because it is not valid.
21. Paulus, Questions, Book XII.
Where a ward who has borrowed ten aureiwithout the authority of his guardian
receives a legacy from his creditor on condition that lie will pay his heir the
ten aureiwhich he borrowed, and he does so in one payment, he will both comply
with the condition and be released from a natural obligation, so that the
Falcidian Law will also apply to the money paid to the heir; although this
would not be the case if it had been paid only for the purpose of complying
with the condition. Moreover, this is considered a payment to such an extent
that if the legacy should be rejected, or the slave Stichus, who was
bequeathed, should die, the ward cannot recover anything.
(1) If my slave and myself are appointed heirs to unequal shares of an estate,
and the three-fourths of the share of the slave are not ex-
hausted by the payment of legacies, those legatees in whose favor I am charged
will be benefited, in opposition to the Falcidian Law, by the amount which will
come into my hands out of the share of the slave in excess of the Falcidian
portion of his share.
On the other hand, if a slave is bequeathed to my slave, and ten aureiare
bequeathed to me, the Falcidian portion of the slave will not, in conformity
with the Falcidian Law, be deducted from the ten aureibequeathed to me, for I
shall retain the fourth of the person of the slave, even though my share of the
bequest may not be exhausted.
22. The Same, Questions, Book XVII.
&quot;Nesennius Apollinaris to Julius Paulus. The following case actually
occurred. Titia appointed her three daughters heirs to equal shares of her
estate, and left them charged with legacies for the benefit of one another, but
she charged one of them in such a way that the Falcidian Law would apply as
well to her co-heirs as to strangers to whom other property was
bequeathed.&quot;
I ask whether the Falcidian Law is applicable against her co-heirs who were
themselves charged with legacies for her benefit, and, if it should not be
applicable, and she is barred by an exception on the ground of bad faith, how
can the computation of the Falcidian portion be made as against the foreign
legatees? I answered that what is received from a co-heir, as a legacy, does
not profit the legatee by releasing him from the operation of the Falcidian
Law.
Where, however, an heir who is obliged to pay a legacy demands something from
the same person under the terms of the will, he should not be heard, if he
wishes to avail himself of the benefit of the Falcidian Law against the said
person, if what he is entitled to receive under the will of the testator, is
equal to what he wishes to deduct from the legacy. With reference to the other
legatees, it is evident that the heir will not be required to subject to the
operation of the Falcidian Law all that he pays to his co-heir, but only what
he actually gives him, that is, if he receives nothing from him.
(1) Where a slave is appointed an heir by someone, and his master is charged
with a trust and the slave with a legacy, the calculation must first be made
with reference to the legacy, and then the trust will be discharged out of what
remains. The master, however, will only be liable for what comes into his
hands, and, moreover, he will only receive what remains after the legacies have
been deducted. It is clear that the Falcidian Law will apply.
(2) But if the master who was appointed heir fails to accept the estate and
orders his slave, who was substituted for him, to do so, the legacies with
which the master himself was charged must first be paid, and then, after
reserving the Falcidian portion, payment should be made of those with which the
slave was charged.
(3) Where a release from his obligation is bequeathed to a debtor, even though
the latter may not be solvent, the entire legacy must be computed, although the
bequest of the claim cannot increase the estate except in the event of payment.
Therefore, if the Falcidian Law is
applicable, what was bequeathed to the debtor will be held to have increased
the amount of the legacy. The other legacies will also be diminished by this
one, and it will be diminished by the others; for the debtor is considered to
receive the legacy by the mere fact of his being released from liability.
(4) Where, however, the claim is bequeathed to a third party, the legacy is
void, and it will not be liable to contribution with the others.
23. Scsevola, Questions, Book XV.
Where a tract of land with a right of way is devised to me, and, after the
deduction of the Falcidian portion, the estimated value of the right of way is
greater, I will be entitled to the land without incumbrance, and the right of
way will be extinguished. If, however, the right of way should be bequeathed,
and the estate should prove insolvent, the right of way will not be due.
Where the land and the right of way are both devised, it should also be
considered whether the heir will be entitled to make, from one or the other, a
deduction of less than the value of the right of way. Strictly speaking, it may
be said that, in this instance, the devisee will not only be entitled to the
entire tract of land, but can also file an exception on the ground of bad
faith, in order to obtain what is lacking, so that he may not have more than
can be claimed under the Falcidian Law. Hence the right of way will only be
lost where the requirements of the Falcidian Law amount to more than its value.
24. Paulus, Opinions, Book XIV.
Paulus says that where property belonging to an estate has been abstracted by
the heir, and the amount due under the Falcidian Law must be ascertained, the
estimate shall be made just as if what has been taken had been included in the
estate.
(1) The same authority gives it as his opinion that the offspring of female
slaves born before the day when the trust took effect will belong to the heirs
of him who was charged with the execution of the trust; and where a question
with reference to the Falcidian Law arises, a fourth of the value of the
children and a fourth of the interest on the same must be computed.
(2) The same authority gives it as his opinion that where a legacy of property
belonging to the heir is bequeathed, any profits of said property, which have
been collected by him after the day when the trust became operative, cannot be
charged against the fourth of the heir, even though he is not required to
deliver them to the beneficiary of the trust.
25. Scsevola, Opinions, Book IV.
A woman appointed her husband and their son heirs to equal shares of her
estate. The question arose whether, in calculating the portion allowed by the
Falcidian Law, the share of the husband which had come into his hands from the
same estate through his son should be charged. The answer was that, if by the
appointment of his son, he
had received as much as was sufficient for the Falcidian portion, nothing
should be deducted on that account.
(1) A testator bequeathed an estate to his freedman, and charged him by a trust
to pay ten aureito Seia, every year. The question arose, if the Falcidian Law
diminished the legacy of the freedman, whether the annual trust with which he
was charged for the benefit of Seia would also be diminished, provided that the
income exceeded the annual payment. The answer was that, according to the facts
stated, it would not appear to have been diminished, unless the intention of
the testator was proved to be otherwise.
26. The Same, Opinions, Book V.
Atestator bequeathed a string of thirty-five pearls, which was in the
possession of the legatee at the time of his death. I ask whether the said
string of pearls should be restored to the heir, in order to enable him to
reserve a portion of them under the Falcidian Law. The answer was that the heir
could bring an action to compel its restitution to him, and if he preferred to
do so, he could bring suit to recover that portion of the string of pearls
which he was entitled to keep under the provisions of the Falcidian Law.
(1) The question arose whether the value of statues is subject to the operation
of the Falcidian Law. The answer was that it is.
27. The Same, Opinions, Book VI.
&quot;Let Seius and Agerius be my heirs, if within thirty days after my death
they execute a bond to my town that they will be content with such-and-such a
sum of aurei,and will renounce the benefit of the Falcidian Law; and I hereby
substitute the said heirs for one another. If they should not comply with my
wishes, let them be disinherited.&quot;
The question arose whether the appointed heirs, having been substituted under
the same condition, could enter upon the estate if they refused to comply with
the condition. The answer was that Seius and Agerius, who were appointed in the
first place, could enter upon the estate, just as if the condition which had
been fraudulently imposed had not been imposed at all.
28. Msecianus, Trusts, Book I.
Where a foreign heir has been appointed by a son, the Falcidian Law applies
even to a legacy which the son has bequeathed to his father.
29. Paulus, Trusts, Book II.
When I am charged with a trust or a legacy for your benefit, and you are
requested after a certain time to deliver the same to me, I do not think that
this should be subject to the operation of the Falcidian Law, because I shall
begin to receive the property subsequently as the beneficiary of a trust.
30. Msecianus, Trusts, Book Vill.
In the application of the Falcidian Law, losses caused by the death of slaves
and other animals, or by theft, robbery, fires, the ruin of
houses, shipwreck, and violence of enemies, depredators and thieves, or by
debtors, in fine, any loss whatsoever, must be borne by the heirs, provided
that the legatees are not to blame.
In like manner, the profits obtained by the heir from crops, the offspring of
female slaves, and any acquisitions made by slaves (as, for instance, through
stipulations, the delivery of property, legacies, or estates left to them, and
other donations of every description) as well as servitudes---where lands become
more valuable through being released from them---or where any rights of action,
for example, those for theft, damage, injury, and others of this kind, are none
of them liable to the operation of the Falcidian Law.
(1) Where the heir is directed either to sell or purchase a tract of land or
any other kind of property for a certain price before estimating the Falcidian
portion, in order to ascertain the amount of the legacy, only that sum is
considered as bequeathed which either amounts to more or less than the price
which the testator ordered to be paid or received for the said property. Then,
from the portion which remains after the legacies have been deducted, a still
further deduction will be made, since the said price is not acquired mortis
causa,but after the deduction has been made, the remainder is understood to
have been
bequeathed.
(2) It should also be carefully noted that the ordinary rule, &quot;All losses
which occur after the death of the testator concern the heir alone,&quot; is of
universal application, and must be accepted without any distinction. For as
even where the Falcidian Law does not apply at all, the heir will legally be
compelled to bear the entire loss, so he must bear his share of it in cases
where the Falcidian Law is operative. For, generally speaking, this is the
rule, since losses sustained after the death of the testator cannot be
deducted, in order to prevent the portion which is lost from being taken from
the legacies or trusts.
(3) It is, however, true that no deduction can be made except with reference to
such articles alone as can be weighed, counted, or measured; and where any loss
happens after the death of the testator the deduction must be made from the
share belonging to the legatee, dependent upon the appraised value of the
estate of the deceased at the time of his death.
(4) With regard to property which can be positively designated, and other
articles left as follows, &quot;The money which I have in such-and-such a
chest,&quot; &quot;The wine which I have in such-and-such casks,&quot;
&quot;The weight of silver which I have in such-and-such a building,&quot; and
the property is lost, or becomes deteriorated without the fault of the heir,
there is no doubt that either none of the legacy will be due under such
circumstances, or, after the deduction of the Falcidian portion, the legatees
will be entitled to a share of whatever remains, based upon an estimate of the
value of the property belonging to the testator at the time of his death.
(5) Where property is left which is of an uncertain character, a distinction
must be made; for if a testator should bequeath some articles without
specifically designating them, as, for instance, where he
leaves to anyone the silver plate which he may select, and all the silver plate
should be lost without the heir being to blame, nothing will be due to the
legatee.
If, however, a certain amount of silver was absolutely bequeathed, even though
all the silver of the testator should be lost, the Falcidian Law will apply,
and that portion of the amount can be taken which was with the property of the
estate at the time that the testator died, and any losses which may
subsequently have occurred will not cause any diminution of the legacy.
(6) The heir will not be liable for any portion of the property bequeathed
which is lost, and not even for the appraised value of the same, any more than
if all the articles bequeathed had been specifically enumerated.
(7) In estimating the amount due to the heir under the Falcidian Law, anything
which is paid to him in compliance with the conditions of the will shall not be
charged against his fourth; still, it is held by Celsus and our Julianus that a
charge should be made when he was directed to receive a sum of money from the
beneficiary of the trust, to whom he has been ordered to deliver the estate,
where the testator did not direct the beneficiary to pay the said sum under
some condition; as, for instance, where the heir was directed to sell the
property for a specified amount, for then he will pay the money to the heir,
not for the purpose of complying with a condition, but as a price.
In a similar case, it has also been asked whether the beneficiary of the trust
can be compelled to pay the said sum, and take the estate, even if he is
unwilling to do so, just as if he himself had been charged with a trust for the
benefit of the heir. This is not probable, however, as a provision of this kind
appears to have been made in favor of the beneficiary of the trust rather than
against him.
(8) When the Falcidian Law applies, that property is not subject to
contribution where the heir himself is charged with a trust for the benefit of
himself, or his slave. The case, however, is different where the legacies to
the slave are payable at a certain time; for when the day of his freedom
arrives he will be entitled to them, and they become subject to contribution.
Where, however, anyone makes a bequest to a slave without the grant of his
freedom, and which, for this reason, is void, or leaves it subject to a trust,
it will not be considered as liable to contribution under this law.
(9) Property, which it is certain cannot legally be left in trust, is not
included in that liable to contribution under the Falcidian Law.
31. Pomponius, Trusts, Book II.
The person to whom payment is made in compliance with the terms of a trust,
just as one to whom a legacy is bequeathed, is obliged to give security to
return anything which he receives in excess of what he is entitled to under the
Falcidian Law; as, for example, where the amount due under the Falcidian Law is
still in suspense, on account of the condition upon which other trusts or
legacies are dependent not having yet been fulfilled.
But, according to the opinion of Cassius and the ancient authorities, where a
minor is charged with a trust, he to whom the amount is paid should furnish
security with reference to the property with which the substitute was charged;
for although there may be a repetition of what has been paid under the
provisions of the trust, which really is not due, still it is more satisfactory
for security to be given to him by whom the money is paid, so that he may not
sustain any loss through the party who receives it becoming insolvent.
32. Msecianus, Trusts, Book IX.
Penal actions, whether they are derived from the Civil or the Praetorian Law,
with the exception of popular actions, should, none the less, be reckoned among
the assets of the party entitled to them, because they become extinguished by
the death of the criminal. Moreover, on the other hand, these actions do not
take anything from the estate of the culprit in case of his death. But a right
of action for injury sustained cannot be counted as a part of the estate of the
person entitled to the same, in case of his death; because it itself is
extinguished at that time, just as an usufruct, or an allowance which is
payable to anyone at stated periods, for instance monthly or annually, as long
as he lives. For an obligation of any kind only affords ground for the
diminution of the property of a debtor, where it is transferred to his heir;
nor, on the other hand, should the debtor be understood to have had that much
less property during his lifetime, since, if anyone should stipulate that a sum
shall begin to be due when he dies, his estate will, nevertheless, be
increased, just as if he himself should promise, under the same condition, that
it shall be diminished at the time of his death.
(1) Honorary actions, also, which are permitted by the Praetor to be brought
within a certain time, increase the estate of the person entitled to bring
them, at the time of his death, and decrease that of the person against whom
they can be brought, if they are such as also pass to the heir.
(2) Julianus says that if the shares of two heirs are exhausted by legacies,
and one of them has received a Praetorian bond from the legatees, he will be
entitled to bring an action on the stipulation, not for half, but in proportion
to his share of everything acquired by them over and above the amount
authorized by the Falcidian Law. For all Praetorian stipulations are subject to
the same interpretation, as where a stipulation has been made it is settled
that the judgment shall be paid, whether the plaintiff or the defendant leaves
several heirs. The action cannot be brought by all, or against all of them, but
only in favor of the heirs -of those who gained the suit, and against the heirs
of those who lost it, and in favor of those against whom no defence was made,
and against those who did not defend the suit.
(3) Where a legacy of a hundred aureiis left, payable in one, two, and three
years, it has been decided that the Falcidian portion shall be deducted from
all the payments made, and not merely from the last one.
(4) Where part of the legacy of twenty aureibequeathed to Titius has been
deducted under the Falcidian Law, and the legatee was requested to pay five
aureito Seius, our Vindius says that the same proportion can be deducted by the
legatee from the five due to Seius as was deducted from the twenty due to
Titius.
This opinion is founded both on equity and reason, because, like the heir, the
legatee is obliged to execute the trust, and, as he cannot, personally, profit
by the Falcidian Law, the loss which he has sustained must not be borne by him,
unless the testator had charged him to deliver everything that he had received
under the terms of the will.
(5) If, however, the legatee should be requested to manumit either his own
slave, or one belonging to another, he must, by all means, give him freedom.
This is not contrary to what is above stated, because the favor conceded to
liberty frequently gives rise to other and even more indulgent decisions.
33. Paulus, Trusts, Book HI.
Where a slave is bequeathed to you, and you are charged to manumit him, and
there is nothing more from which you can obtain the fourth which an heir can
reserve under the Falcidian Law, the Senate has decided that the Falcidian Law
will not apply.
34. Marcellus, Digest, Book XLH.
The Falcidian Law is applicable to the case of a slave bequeathed for
manumission by the testator; but if the latter left money, or anything else,
and charged the legatee to manumit his own slave, or that of another, the law
will apply.
35. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book VI.
If anything besides was left to the slave, it is clear that the Senate declared
that the Falcidian Law would be applicable. Therefore, Scse-vola says that the
Falcidian Law will apply to anything which was bequeathed to the slave in
addition to his freedom, and hence the price which is to be paid for him would
be liable to contribution.
36. Paulus, Trusts, Book HI.
Where the slave himself has not been bequeathed, but a sum of money has, and
the legatee is asked to manumit his slave, he will be subject to the operation
of the Falcidian Law, and will, nevertheless, be compelled to manumit him;
because his slave is considered to be worth as much as the sum bequeathed.
(1) But what if the slave should belong to another? In this instance he cannot
be compelled to pay more for him than he received.
(2) If, however, the heir is charged to manumit the slave, it has been decided
that the value of the latter should be deducted as a debt of the estate.
(3) Where a slave alone is bequeathed, and presented with his freedom, under a
trust, although the Falcidian Law will apply, the legatee can claim or recover
the entire slave, and even if the legatee
should have received something in addition to the slave, the entire slave can
still be demanded, but the fourth part of each legacy shall be retained, in
order that the grant of freedom may take effect.
(4) Where it is uncertain whether freedom should be granted or not, for
instance, because it was bequeathed under some condition, or to take effect
after a certain time, and while the uncertainty exists whether it should be
bestowed or not, should the application of the Falcidian Law be permitted, as,
in the meantime, the slave may either die, or the condition fail of fulfilment?
When the slave is entitled to his freedom, or it is due, can the legatee claim
that portion which was deducted on account of the Falcidian Law? It was held by
Csecilius that if the heir, during the intervening time, had gained anything
through the services of the slave, he should include it in the value of the
latter in deducting the Falcidian portion.
37. Valens, On Trusts, Book VI.
The appraisement of such a slave should be made in the same way as that of one
who is to become free under a certain condition.
(1) Where, however, the heir was charged to manumit a slave belonging to
another, it was decided that the price of the said slave should also be
deducted from the assets of the estate.
38. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Law, Book I. Aslave who is to become free under
a certain condition does not increase the number of the slaves of the heir.
(1) Slaves held in common are counted as belonging to the estate of each of
their masters.
(2) When the usufruct of a slave belongs to another, his ownership forms part
of the estate of his master; when he is pledged, he belongs to the estate of
the debtor when he is sold under the terms of the Lex Commissoria,or
conditionally, for a certain time, he belongs to the vendor.
39. Paulus, Decisions, Book III.
Not only the value of those slaves to whom freedom was granted, but also that
of those who have been condemned to death, is deducted from the assets of the
estate, just as the value of those whom the Praetor has liberated on account of
their having given information of projected assassination, or for having
revealed a conspiracy, is also deducted.
40. Hermogenianus, Epitomes of Laio, Boole IV.
The Falcidian Law applies to the will of a veteran, whether he be the head of a
household or a son under paternal control, even if he should die within a year
after his discharge.
(1) If a tract of land of the value of twenty aureishould be devised to anyone
on condition of his paying ten, the devisee will be entitled to the entire
tract of land.
41. Paulus, On the Edict, Book IX.
He is not considered to be free from bad faith who pays legacies without
security having been furnished, where a controversy has already arisen with
reference to the estate.
42. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book XIV.
In estimating the amount due under the Falcidian Law, the actual value of the
property must be appraised.
43. The Same, On the Edict, Book XIX.
Where slaves who have been in the hands of the enemy return after the death of
the testator, they increase the value of the estate, so far as the Falcidian
Law is concerned.
44. The Same, On the Edict, Book XXI.
The Falcidian Law will not be applicable where a slave is to become free on
condition of his paying a certain sum, and he does so with money belonging to
another person, and not with what forms part of the estate of the deceased, or
where he who is to comply with this condition becomes free for other reasons.
45. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LX.
In the consideration of the Falcidian Law, anything which is left to be paid
within a certain period is not held to have been absolutely bequeathed; for the
value of advantage enjoyed by the heir in the meantime must be computed.
(1) Proculus thinks that where a question arises under .the Falcidian Law with
reference to legacies conditionally bequeathed, that only such property as is
salable is included in them. If this is the case, and the deduction can be
made, as much will be considered to be due as the claim will bring, if sold.
This opinion, however, has not been adopted, therefore it is better that the
transaction should be arranged by both parties giving security.
46. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXVI.
Where a person who is entitled to retain the Falcidian portion promises, in
compliance with the will of the testator, that he will renounce his claim to
it, he will be compelled to carry out his agreement.
47. The Same, On the Edict, Book LXXIX.
When, the Falcidian Law is operative, it includes all payments. Sometimes,
however, it can only be determined subsequently whether it is applicable or
not, as for example, where a legacy is left payable annually, as long as the
Falcidian Law does not apply, the payments will be made every year without
deduction. If, however, a year should come when it does apply, and what is
payable exceeds three-fourths of the value of the estate, the result will be
that all the payments previously made every year will be diminished.
(1) Neither the legatee nor the beneficiary of a trust can enjoy the benefit of
the Falcidian Law, even though the estate may be delivered to him under the
terms of the Trebellian Decree of the Senate.
48. Paulus, On the Edict of the Curule ^Ediles, Book II.
Where the purchaser of a slave becomes the heir of the vendor, or vice
versa,and the slave is evicted, shall double his value be deducted, or only his
actual value, in computing the amount due under the Falcidian Law; for the
amount would be double if there should be another heir? The more equitable
opinion is, that while the heir is the same, only the actual value of the slave
should be calculated.
49. The Same, On Plautius, Book XII.
Plautius: I devised a tract of land to a slave whom I had already bequeathed to
you. Atilicinus, Nerva, and Sabinus think that the Falcidian portion should be
first calculated with reference to the slave, and whatever part should be
deducted from his value ought not to be considered, so far as the land which
was devised was concerned; and then the Falcidian portion should be deducted
from the remainder of the land, just as is the case with all legacies. Cassius
says that as soon as the Falcidian portion is deducted, the slave begins to
become the common property of the heir and the legatee.
When, however, a legacy is made to a slave held in common by him and another,
the entire legacy will belong to the other joint-owner, because it can only be
valid with reference to his person; for which reason the deduction of the
portion authorized by the Falcidian Law can be made from the land but once.
Paulus: We adopt the opinion of Cassius, for the Divine Pius stated in a
Rescript that where the slave was made the beneficiary of the trust, under
these circumstances the entire bequest would belong to the joint-owner.
(1) It sometimes happens that a second legacy is extinguished on account of the
Falcidian Law; as, for example, where a tract of land and a right of way
through another tract to give access to it is granted. For if a part of the
land should be retained by the heir under the Falcidian Law, the devise of the
right of way cannot stand, because a servitude cannot be partially acquired.
50. Celsus, Digest, Book XIV.
There is no doubt that those legacies from which the heir can exclude the
legatee by means of an exception should be included in his fourth, and hence
they do not diminish the legacies of others.
51. Julianus, Digest, Book LXI.
It makes no difference whether a legacy becomes void in the beginning, or
something occurs subsequently on account of which an action cannot be brought
by the legatee to recover it.
52. Marcellus, Digest, Book IX.
A freedman appointed his patron heir to his entire estate, which amounted to
two hundred aurei,and then bequeathed a hundred and
twenty to his son, and the balance to a stranger. The diminution of the legacy
which was paid to the stranger will benefit the son in acquiring the entire
legacy which was bequeathed to him.
(1) Where, for some reason or other, legacies are not required to be paid, they
are included in the fourth part which the heir is entitled to retain under the
Falcidian Law.
53. Celsus, Digest, Book XVII.
Where the portion due under the Falcidian Law is in suspense, on account of
some condition which has been imposed on the payment of the legacy, those
legacies which are due at once cannot be claimed in full.
54. Marcellus, Digest, Book XV.
A father appointed his son, by whom he had three grandsons, his heir, and
charged him not to alienate a certain tract of land, but to leave it in the
family. The son, at his death, appointed his three sons his heirs. The question
arose whether each of the said sons, as the creditor of his father, could make
a deduction of anything from the estate, on account of the Falcidian Law; as it
was in the power of their father to bequeath the entire trust to any one of his
sons whom he might select. None of them for this reason could deduct anything
on account of the Falcidian Law.
It appears, however, that this opinion will be productive of hardship, for as
the father considered the land as a debt due to his children, he was
necessarily obliged to leave it to them.
55. The Same, Digest, Book XX.
Where ten aurei,payable every year, are bequeathed to Titius, the judge having
jurisdiction under the Falcidian Law to establish the proportion payable by the
heir and other legatees should estimate the value of the legacy at whatever it
could have brought during the life of Titius, it being uncertain how long
Titius might live. After the death of Titius, however, the judge should not
consider anything else than the amount that the heir owned by reason of the
legacy.
56. The Same, Digest, Book XXII.
The owner of a slave who was liable to an action having reference to the
peculiumof the latter became the heir of the creditor. You ask what time should
be considered in computing the value of the peculiumunder the Falcidian Law.
Several authorities hold that the value of the peculiumat the time that the
estate was entered upon should be considered. I doubt whether this is the case,
as it has been determined that the time of the death of the testator is the
date to be observed in calculating the proportion due under the Falcidian Law.
But what difference does it make whether the peculiumof the slave is diminished
after the death of the creditor, or whether the debtor becomes poorer?
(1) On the other hand, someone may ask what course should be pursued if the
slave acquires property before the estate was entered upon? I, myself, ask
whether, the means of the debtor who, at that time, was not solvent, are
increased. And, as it has been decided in the latter instance that the estate
has, after this event, been increased in value; so, if the condition upon which
the claim depended was fulfilled after the death of the creditor, the increase
of the peculiumwould augment the value of the estate.
(2) Scsevola inquires what should be done if the said slave owed ten aureito
the deceased and another person, and had ten aureialtogether in his peculium.Of
course the estate is increased by the ten aurei,which were naturally due to
him, and remain as a portion of his estate.
(3) A certain person, whose entire estate only consisted of one slave,
bequeathed him to Titius, and charged the latter to manumit him at the end of
three years. The heir will, in the meantime, while he is employed by Titius, be
entitled to one-fourth of the value of the services of the slave, in the same
manner .as if the testator had directly given the slave his freedom after the
lapse of three years, and had bequeathed the usufruct or the ownership of said
slave to someone under a trust.
(4) A testator bequeathed his slave Stichus to you, and ten aureito your slave;
or, on the other hand, he bequeathed ten aureito you and Stichus, your slave,
and charged you to manumit Stichus. The Falcidian Law diminishes the legacy,
and you should purchase a part of the slave from the heir, just as if the
testator had bequeathed you both legacies.
(5) It frequently happens that the heir does not enjoy the benefit of this law,
for if a testator, whose estate amounted to a hundred aurei,should give twenty-
five to someone and then appoint him his heir, and bequeath three-fourths of
his estate to another, the heir cannot obtain anything else under the Falcidian
Law, because the testator, during his lifetime, is considered to have made
provision for his future heir.
57. The Same, Digest, Book XXVI.
Where a husband bequeaths a dowry of his wife to someone in order that it may
be returned to her, it must be said that the Falcidian Law does not apply; and
it is clear that in very many instances arrangements are made to leave out the
intermediate party for the benefit of the person entitled to the legacy.
58. Modestinus, Rules, Book IX.The heir is not prevented from claiming the
benefit of the Falcidian Law, even a long time after the death of the testator.
59. The Same, Pandects, Book IX.
He is considered to be unworthy of the benefit of the Falcidian Law, who acts
in such a way as to cause the trust to be extinguished.
(1) Moreover, where an heir is requested to transfer the estate to some one who
is not entitled to receive it, he will not, by the Plancian Decree of the
Senate,1 be permitted to retain the fourth of said estate; but the said fourth,
in accordance with a Rescript of the Divine Pius, will belong to the Treasury.
60. Javolenus, On Cassius, Book XIV.
Where a father substitutes an heir for his daughter, who has not yet arrived at
puberty, any property which has been received as a legacy by the substitute
from the father will not, when the estate passes to the former, be included in
the computation made to ascertain the proportion due under the Falcidian Law.
(1) Where a legacy is claimed, and an oath was made in court by the legatee,
the amount due under the Falcidian Law shall not be ascertained from the sum to
which the legatee has made oath, but from the true value of the property which
is claimed; for what accrues by way of penalty does not come within the scope
of the Falcidian Law.
61. The Same, Epistles, Book IV.
Atract of land belonging to another was bequeathed to you. As the heir could
not obtain it, except at an unreasonable price, he bought it for a sum far
above its actual value, and the result of the purchase was that a reduction of
the legacies was required under the Falcidian Law.
I ask if the land had been bought for what it was really worth, and the
legacies had not been subject to diminution, whether, in this instance, the
heir would have the right to reserve a part due to the legatees, because, in
compliance with the will of the deceased, he had purchased the land for more
than its value. The answer was that the heir could not, under the Falcidian
Law, charge the other legacies with what he had paid to the legatee over and
above the true price of the land, because his negligence ought not to prejudice
the legatee, any
1 By the Plancian Decree of the Senate, passed during the reign of the Emperor
Hadrian, a woman who was pregnant when divorced by her husband was required,
within thirty days thereafter, either in person or by someone to whose
authority she was subject, to notify her husband of her condition, which gave
him an opportunity to repudiate the paternity of the child, and if he did not
do so, placed him under the obligation to support it. It also enabled him to
appoint persons to make a personal inspection of the woman, to determine
whether pregnancy actually existed, and to send custodians to watch her, and
provide against the perpetration of fraud. If she failed to give notice, or
refused to allow the inspection, or to admit the custodians appointed by her
husband, she could not bring suit against him; otherwise, she was permitted to
institute legal proceedings, but the onus probandirested on her. The failure of
the wife to take action did not, however, prejudice the rights of the unborn
child.
When the husband ignored the notice, did not deny its paternity, or did not
send custodians, he could be forced to acknowledge the child as his own. If he
died before availing himself of the precautions authorized by law, the woman
could demand possession of his estate in the name of her unborn offspring. In
this case another inspection might be made at the instance of the heirs of the
deceased husband.---ED.
more than he could release himself from liability by tendering the actual value
of the property.
62. Ulpianus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book I.
Julianus says that, in estimating the portion due under the Falcidian Law, the
following rule should be observed, namely, where there are two promising, or
two stipulating debtors, and they are partners, the common obligation should be
divided between them; just as if each one had stipulated or promised to pay the
amount individually.
If, however, no partnership existed between them, the matter would remain in
abeyance, and a calculation should be made in order to determine what is due to
the estates of the creditors, or what should be deducted from those of the
debtors.
(1) Any property belonging to the estate of the deceased must be estimated at
its value, that is to say, at the price it will bring at the present time; and
it should be understood that the appraisement must not be made of the value
which the property would have under certain conditions.
63. Paulus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book II.
The value of property should be estimated, not by affection nor according to
any particular advantage attaching to it, but for what it can be disposed of at
an ordinary sale. For where a father is in possession of a slave who is his
natural son, he is none the more wealthy because, if the slave was in the
possession of another person, he would be willing to pay a larger sum to
recover him than someone else.
Nor will he who has possession of the natural son of another be considered to
have the value of the price for which he could sell him to his father, since
the prospective time of his sale ought not to be considered, but his value at
present; and not the fact that he is the son of someone else, but what he is
worth as a slave. The same rule applies to a slave who has caused some damage,
for no one becomes any more valuable for having committed an offence.
Pedius says that a slave who has been appointed an heir after the death of his
master is no more valuable for the reason that he will bring more at a sale;
for it is absurd to suppose that where I have been appointed an heir, I am any
the richer before I accept the estate, or where my slave is appointed an heir,
that I immediately become more wealthy, as there may be many reasons why he
should not accept the estate by my order. It is certain that he will acquire
the estate for me when he does enter upon it, but it is preposterous to assume
that we become enriched thereby before we obtain the property.
(1) Where a debtor of the testator is not solvent, the claim is only considered
to be worth what can be collected from him.
(2) Places and times occasionally cause a difference in the price of property,
for oil does not sell at the same price in Rome that it does in Spain, nor has
it the same value in continuous bad years that it has in favorable ones; hence,
under such circumstances, the value of articles should not be fixed by their
scarcity at certain periods, nor on account of something which rarely occurs.
64. Ulpianus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book XIII.
Where the following provision is included in a will, &quot;Let my heir be
charged with the payment of ten aureito Lucius Titius, and let as much more be
given him as he will lose by the operation of the Falcidian Law,&quot; the will
of the testator must be executed.
65. Paulus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book VI.
Where a tract of land, worth fifty aurei,is devised under the condition that
the party to whom it is left shall pay fifty aureito the heir, many authorities
think that the devise is valid, because the reason for complying with the
condition is stated. It is established that the devise is subject to the
Falcidian Law. Where, however, fifty aureiare bequeathed on condition that the
legatee pays fifty to the heir, the legacy is not only void, but also
ridiculous.
66. Ulpianus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book XVIII.
The following must be noted with reference to the operation of the Falcidian
Law, where a legacy is bequeathed to anyone conditionally, or payable after a
certain time. If ten aureishould be bequeathed to someone under a condition,
and the condition is fulfilled, for instance, after the lapse of ten years, the
said ten aureiwill not be considered to have been bequeathed to the legatee,
but a smaller amount, for the interval, and the interest during that interval
cause reduction of the original sum of ten aurei.
(1) Just as legacies are not payable unless a balance remains after deducting
the amount of the debts from the property of the estate, so donations mortis
causawill not be due, but may be annulled by the indebtedness of the estate.
Therefore, if the indebtedness is very large, no one can receive property given
to him mortis causa,out of the funds of the estate.
67. Terentius Clemens, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book IV.
Whenever more is bequeathed to any person than he is legally entitled to
receive, and the Falcidian Law is applicable, the amount due under it must
first be estimated, so that, after what is excepted by the Falcidian Law has
been deducted, the balance will be payable, if it does not exceed the amount
specified by law.
68. Mtmlms Macer, On the Law of Five Per Cent Tax of Estates, Book II.
Ulpianus says that the following rule should be adopted in making the estimate
of maintenance to be furnished. The amount bequeathed to anyone for this
purpose from the first to the twentieth year is computed to have lasted for
thirty years, and the Falcidian portion of that sum shall be reserved. From
twenty to twenty-five years, the amount is calculated for twenty-eight
years,from twenty to thirty years, the amount is calculated for twenty-five
years; from thirty to thirty-five years, the amount is calculated for twenty-
two years, from thirty to forty years, it is computed for twenty years; from
forty to fifty years,
the computation is made for as many years as the party lacks of the sixtieth
year after having omitted one year; from the fiftieth to the fifty-fifth, the
amount is calculated for nine years; from the fifty-fifth to the sixtieth year,
it is calculated for seven years; and for any age above sixty, no matter what
it may be, the computation is made for five years.
Ulpianus also says that we use this same rule in making the calculation with
reference to the legacy of an usufruct. Nevertheless, it is the practice for
the computation to be made for thirty years from the first to the thirtieth,
but after the age of thirty years it is made for as many years as the legatee
lacks of being sixty; hence the computation is never made for a longer time
than thirty years. Finally, in like manner, the computation is made for the
period of thirty years, where the usufruct of property is bequeathed to the
State, either simply, or for the purpose of celebrating games.
(1) Where one of the heirs claims that certain property belongs to him
individually, and it is afterwards proved to constitute part of the estate,
certain authorities hold that the Falcidian portion cannot be reserved out of
said property, because it makes no difference whether the heir appropriated it,
or denied that it belonged to the estate. This opinion Ulpianus very properly
does not accept.
69. Pomponius, On Sabinus, Book V.
Where the usufruct of property is bequeathed, the debts must be deducted from
all the assets of the estate; as, according to the Decree of the Senate, there
is no property which is not included in the legacy of an usufruct.
70. Ulpianus, On Sabinus, Book XIX.
The stipulation for the Falcidian portion takes effect immediately, when the
condition on which the legacy or the debt depends is fulfilled.
71. Paulus, On the Edict, Book XXXII.
In disposing of his rights to an estate, an heir can provide that in case the
Falcidian Law should apply, the entire legacy shall be paid by the purchaser,
because this law was enacted for the benefit of the heir, and the latter is not
defrauded, if he himself diminishes his own right.
72. Gaius, On the Edict of the Prsetor with Reference to Legacies, Book III.
The value of an estate is estimated after having deducted any expenses which
may be incurred by the sale of property.
73. The Same, On the Provincial Edict, Book XVIII.
In appraising an estate, it has been decided that its value at the time of the
death of the testator should be ascertained. Therefore, if anyone has property
worth a hundred aureiand bequeaths all of it, no profit will accrue to the
legatees, if, before the estate is entered upon it should be increased by
anything obtained through slaves belonging to it, or by the birth of the
offspring of female slaves, or from the in-
crease of flocks, to such an extent that the hundred aurei,included in the
legacies, having been paid, the heir will still have enough for his fourth; but
it will, nevertheless, be necessary for the fourth part of the legacies to be
deducted.
On the other hand, if the testator should bequeath seventy-five aureiout of the
hundred, and, before the estate was entered upon, the amount should be
diminished (for instance by fire, shipwreck, or the death of slaves), to such
an extent that not more than seventy-five aurei,or even less than that sum,
remains, the legacies must be paid in full; for this cannot be considered
injurious to the heir, as he is at liberty not to accept the estate. Hence it
becomes necessary for the legatees to compromise with the heir for a part of
their legacies, in order to avoid obtaining nothing in case he should refuse to
take under the will.
(1) Very serious doubts arise with reference to certain matters, the condition
of whose accomplishment depends upon the time of the death of the testator;
that is to say, where a debt is due under a condition, shall it be counted as
part of the assets of the stipulator, or shall it be deducted from the estate
of the promisor? Our present practice is that the amount which the obligation
will bring, if sold, shall be considered as added to the estate of the
stipulator, but deducted from that of the promisor; or the question can be
settled by the parties giving security to one another; so that the claim may be
considered as absolutely due, or as if nothing was due at all; therefore the
heirs and the legatees can furnish one another security, so that, if the
condition should be fulfilled, the heir may pay to the legatees the amount
which he has withheld, or the legatees may refund whatever they have received
in excess of that to which they were entitled.
(2) Even where some legacies have been absolutely bequeathed, and some have
been bequeathed under a condition, and the condition was fulfilled, the
Falcidian Law will apply, but the legacies absolutely bequeathed should only be
paid after security has been taken. In a case of this kind, it is generally the
custom for the legacies absolutely bequeathed to be paid just as if no others
had been left conditionally; the legatees, however, should give security that
after the condition has been complied with, they will return any excess which
they may have received.
(3) A bond of this kind is considered necessary, where freedom is granted to
certain slaves conditionally by the same will, because the value of said slaves
should be deducted from the bulk of the estate, after the condition has been
complied with.
(4) It is evident that the law is different, where legacies are bequeathed
payable within a certain time, since it is absolutely certain that they will be
due to the legatee himself, or to his heirs. It must, however, be understood
that as much less will be deducted from the assets of the estate as the heir,
in the meantime, until the day for payment arrives, will obtain by way of
profit from the crops, or from interest.
(5) Therefore the best course will be for the testator, in bequeathing his
property, to make such a disposition of the same that nothing
over three-fourths of it will remain. If anyone should exceed the three-
fourths, the legacies will be diminished pro rata,by operation of law. For
example, where a man has an estate of four hundred aurei,and bequeaths the
whole of it in legacies, the fourth part of his legacy will be taken from each
legatee. If he should bequeath three hundred and fifty aurei,the eighth of each
legacy will be deducted; if, however, he should bequeath five hundred aurei,and
should only have four hundred; in the first place, the fifth part, and
afterwards the fourth part will be deducted, for the amount should first be
deducted which is in excess of the value of the property of the estate, and
afterwards what the heir is entitled to out of the actual assets of the same.
74. The Same, On the Edict of the Prsetor with Reference to Legacies, Book V.
Where, however, it is said that an heir who is entitled to his fourth under the
will of the deceased is obliged to pay the legacies in full, we must understand
that this applies where he receives the estate by hereditary right, for what
anyone receives from his co-heir, as a legacy, shall not be charged to his
fourth.
75. Marcellus, On the Digest of Julianus, Book XL.
Where a bequest is made to an heir in order that he may pay the legacies in
full, as well as the trust with which he is charged, an action based on the
legacy will be refused him if he prefers to avail himself of the benefit of the
Falcidian Law.
76. Gaius, On the Edict of the Prsetor, Book III.
Any property, however, which is given either by a co-heir, a legatee, or a
slave who is to be free conditionally, for the purpose of complying with the
condition, shall not be charged to the Falcidian portion, because it is
obtained mortis causa.It is clear that if the heir should receive any money
from the peculiumof the slave, he must charge it proportionally to his share,
because the said proportional share does not pass to him mortis causa,but he is
understood to acquire it by hereditary right.
(1) For which reason it has been decided that any bequests which legatees have
no right to receive, and which, on this account, will belong to the heirs, the
latter do not obtain by hereditary right, and therefore they must be charged to
the fourth; for it does not make any difference whether property is bequeathed
to him in the first place, or whether, after it has been bequeathed, it remains
in his hands.
77. The Same, On the Provincial Edict, Book XVIII.
There is no doubt that the advantages conferred by the Falcidian Law are
available by every individual heir, and therefore, if Titius and Seius have
been appointed heirs, and the half of the estate belonging to Titius is
exhausted in legacies, so that the fourth part of the entire property is left
to Seius, Titius will be entitled to the benefit of the Falcidian Law.
78. The Same, On the Edict of the Urban Prsetor with Reference to Legacies,
Book III.
If, however, one of two heirs should fail to accept his share of the estate,
and the other should become the sole heir to the same, will the Falcidian Law
apply, just as if the entire estate had been left to the latter heir in the
beginning, or should the two portions of it be considered separately with
reference to the operation of the Falcidian Law? It is established that if the
share of the legacy of him who became the heir is exhausted, the legatees will
be benefited by the share which was not accepted, for the reason that it was
not burdened with legacies, since those remaining in the hands of the heir will
cause either nothing at all, or only a small sum to be deducted from what is to
be paid to the other legatees. If, however, the share which was not accepted is
exhausted, it will be subject to the operation of the Falcidian Law, just as if
it belonged to the party by whom it was refused.
79. The Same, On the Provincial Edict, Book XVIII.
In the case of double wills,1 when we make inquiry with reference to the
estate, only the property which the father possessed at the time of his death
should be considered, as it does not make any difference whether the son either
gained or lost anything after the death of his father; and, when we investigate
the legacies, both those which are bequeathed in the first, as well as in the
second will, are liable to contribution, just as if those with which the
testator charged his son, as heir, had been left to him under some other
condition.
80. The Same, On the Edict of the Praetor with Reference to Legacies, Book HI.
Where a testator left an estate of four hundred aurei,and, having appointed his
son who had not reached the age of puberty his heir, bequeathed him two hundred
aurei,and substituted Titius and Seius for him as heirs, and charged Titius
with a legacy of a hundred aurei;let us see what the law is, if the minor
should die before the legacies with which the two substitutes were charged have
been paid.
The heir Titius is the only one who can make use of the Falcidian Law, for as
the two hundred aureiforming part of the estate of the minor belong to him, he
will owe two hundred on account of the legacy, that is a hundred out of the two
hundred which the minor owed, and the hundred which he himself was ordered by
the testator to pay. Therefore, having deducted the fourth of each of these
sums, he will have fifty.
The Falcidian Law, however, is not applicable to Seius personally, since the
two hundred aureibelong to him as a part of the estate of the minor, and he
will owe in legacies a hundred out of the two hundred which were left by the
minor. If, however, the minor himself should
1 A double or second will, tabulse secwndse,was one in which provision was made
for pupillary substitution, to avoid testamentary dispositions from being void
because no one was entitled to receive them.---ED.
pay the legacies, his guardians should see that the legatees furnish him with
security.
(1) There are certain legacies which are not susceptible of division; for
instance, those of rights of way, of rights of passage, and of rights to drive
cattle through land, for things of this kind cannot partly belong to anyone.
Where, however, an heir is directed to build some public work for a
municipality, the legacy is considered to be undivided, for it is not
understood that he constructed a bath, a theatre, or a racecourse, until it has
assumed its proper form, which only happens at its completion. In cases of this
kind, even though there are several heirs, they are individually liable, and
the bequest belongs to all the legatees. Hence, where bequests which are not
susceptible of division are made, they belong wholly to the legatee. Still,
relief can be granted to the heir, if he notifies the legatee to return to him
his share of the amount, after an estimate has been made of the value of the
legacy. If he should not do this, the heir can avail himself of an exception on
the ground of fraud, in bar to legal proceedings instituted by the legatee to
recover the bequest.
81. The Same, On the Provincial Edict, Book XVIII.
The bequest of an usufruct, however, is subject to computation under the terms
of the Falcidian Law, for it is susceptible of division; so that if it is
bequeathed to two parties, they will each be entitled to his share under the
law.
(1) Where a dowry is bequeathed to a wife, it does not come within the terms of
the Falcidian Law, for the reason that she is considered to have received her
own property.
(2) It is expressly provided by the Falcidian Law that such property as has
been purchased or prepared for the use of a wife is not subject to its
operation.
82. Ulpianus, Disputations, Book Vill.
The question arose, where a testator, whose sole estate consisted of a claim of
four hundred aurei,bequeathed to his debtor the release of his claim, but left
four hundred aureito Seius, if the debtor should be insolvent, or was not worth
the hundred aurei,how much each one would be compelled to contribute under the
Falcidian Law. I stated that the Falcidian Law intended that a fourth should be
paid to the heir out of what could be obtained from the estate, and that the
remaining three-fourths should be distributed among the legatees. Therefore,
when a claim which is not perfectly good forms part of an estate, a
distribution of what can be collected should be made pro rata,and the remainder
should be sold so that the value of what can be sold should only be counted
among the assets of the estate.
. Where, however, a release of the claim is bequeathed to the debtor, he
himself is considered to be solvent, and, so far as he himself is concerned he
is rich, although, if he had received the amount which he owed mortis causa,he
would be considered to have received four hundred aurei,even though he could
not pay anything, for he is understood
to have been fully released from liability, even though he may have nothing if
he is released; and hence, upon the application of the Falcidian Law, the heir
should give him a receipt for three hundred aurei,and retain the remainder of
the obligation of a hundred, for if the debtor should become solvent, he can
only collect a hundred aureifrom him.
The same rule must be held to apply where, on account of a donation mortis
causa,a receipt is given to the debtor for four hundred aurei.Wherefore, it has
been very properly held that the effect of the release remains in suspense, for
if, at the time of the death, the entire four hundred aureishould be found
belonging to the debtor, the release of three hundred will be valid. If,
however, any property, in addition, should be found which would be sufficient
for the fourth of the heir, the release will be valid for the entire sum of
four hundred aurei.
But if the debtor can only pay a hundred, for the reason that he is always
considered solvent so far as he himself is concerned, he will be required to
refund a hundred aureito the heir. Therefore, as the debtor is considered to be
individually solvent, the result will be that if an heir should be appointed,
and a release should be bequeathed to the debtor, and four hundred aureito
someone else; if the debtor should be solvent, the heir can retain a hundred
and fifty aureiout of the three hundred, and can pay a hundred and fifty to the
legatee, and in this way he will have his hundred. But if the debtor can only
pay a hundred aurei,a fourth of the same should be reserved by the heir, and
consequently the hundred which can be paid will be divided into four parts,
three-fourths of which will belong to the legatees, the heir will have twenty-
five, the insolvent debtor will credit himself with a hundred and fifty, the
balance of the claim which cannot be collected should be sold, and this shall
be considered as the only property belonging to the estate.
If, however, the debtor is unable to pay anything, he must also be released
from liability for the said one hundred and fifty aurei,and Neratius says a
sale should be made of the balance of the claim, which opinion we also approve.
83. Julianus, Digest, Book XII.
If the creditor of your son should appoint you his heir, and you should desire
to obtain the portion due to you under the Falcidian Law, the amount of the
peculiumwhich existed at the time that the estate was entered upon shall be
included in your fourth.
84. The Same, Digest, Book XIII.
A case sometimes occurs in which the heir is entitled to an action, although
the testator could not have availed himself of it; as, for instance, where a
guardian, at the time when he paid the legacies with which his ward was
charged, did not enter into a stipulation with the legatees, binding them to
refund anything which they might receive above the amount allowed by the
Falcidian Law. The ward, indeed, cannot bring suit against his guardian on this
account, but the latter will be liable to the heir of the minor.
85. The Same, Digest, Book XVIII.
Where a dowry has been given to the father of the husband, and the son alone is
heir to his father, the dowry will, in the first place, be included in
calculating the amount of the estate and the Falcidian portion, and will be
deducted as a debt; otherwise, it would appear that the wife had no dowry.
If, however, the son should have a foreign co-heir, he can always deduct as a
debt of the estate that part of the dowry which he will inherit from his
father, and his co-heir can also do so, before the dowry has been received by
the son.
86. The Same, Digest, Book XL.
Titia, by her will, appointed her brother Titius heir to a third part of her
estate, and charged him to transfer the estate to Secunda and Procula, after
having reserved a fourth part of the same. She also left certain land to her
brother as a preferred legacy. I ask whether Titius can retain all the land
which was left to him in this way, or only what was in proportion to the share
of the estate which he was asked to deliver to the beneficiaries. I answered
that Titius could keep the entire devise, but that he should charge the twelfth
part of said land to his
fourth.
If it had not been stated that the fourth part of the estate must be deducted,
he would have been obliged to include in his fourth the entire third of the
land, under the Falcidian Law, as the Falcidian Law in this instance operates
against the desire of the testatrix.
87. The Same, Digest, Book LXI.
Where a man left an estate composed of a tract of land worth a hundred
aurei,and charged his heir to sell it to Titius for fifty, he should not be
considered to have devised more than fifty, and therefore the Falcidian Law
will not apply.
(1). Moreover, where a testator has an estate composed of two tracts of land,
each worth a hundred aurei,and appoints Titius and myself his heirs, and
charges me to sell the Cornelian Estate to Titius for fifty aurei,and, on the
other hand, charges Titius to sell the Seian Estate to me for fifty aurei,I do
not think that the Falcidian Law will apply, as each of the heirs will be
entitled to half of one of the tracts of land by hereditary right, which is
equal to half of the estate. For there is no doubt that the one who is charged
to sell the Cornelian Estate will be entitled by hereditary right to half of
the Seian Estate, and also he who is charged to sell the Seian Estate can
retain by hereditary right the half of the Cornelian Estate.
(2) If'any one should appoint as his heir a person to whom he had been asked to
pay a hundred aureiat his death, the hundred aureishould be deducted in
computing the proportion due under the Falcidian Law, because if anyone else
had been the heir, the said hundred aureiwould have been included among the
debts of the estate.
(3) If you and Titius are each appointed heirs to the fourth part of an estate,
and then you are appointed heirs to the remaining half under
a condition, and legacies, as well as the freedom of slaves, have been
bequeathed, they should obtain their freedom, and all the legacies should be
paid while the condition is pending; because, if the condition is complied
with, and you should become the heir, both the legacies and the grants of
freedom will be valid; or if the condition should fail, Titius and yourself
will become the heirs.
If you ask how the Falcidian portion can be estimated, and whether, when the
condition is fulfilled, your quarter and your half of the estate should be
combined, and hence the Falcidian portion must be calculated on three-fourths
of the estate, if you pay the legacies with which you are absolutely charged as
heir, we give it as our opinion that the two shares should be combined.
(4) Where a testator appointed his son, who was under the age of puberty, and
Titius, heirs to equal shares of his estate, and charged his son with legacies
amounting to his entire half, but charged Titius with nothing, and substituted
Titius for his son, Titius having entered upon the estate under his
appointment, and the minor son having died, and Titius having become his heir
by virtue of the substitution, the question arose how much he should pay as
legacies. It was decided that he must pay the legacies in full, for the two
halves of the estate having become merged, cause the Falcidian Law to apply to
the entire inheritance, and hence the legacies would be due without any
deduction.
This is, however, true only where the son dies before becoming the heir of his
father. But if he should become his heir, the substitute ought not to pay more
of the legacies than the minor would have been compelled to do, because he is
not bound in his own name, but in that of the deceased minor, who would not
have been required to deliver more than three-fourths of his half to the
legatees.
(5) If, however, the entire half of the foreign heir should have been
bequeathed, and he, by virtue of pupillary substitution, becomes heir to the
minor, who was not charged with the payment of any legacies, it can be said
that they will be increased, and proceedings must be taken just as if the party
had been substituted for any heir whomsoever, and the latter having refused to
accept the estate, the substitute becomes entitled to all of it; for the reason
that the substitute, in fixing the portion due under the Falcidian Law, always
takes into consideration the amount of the property which the father left.
(6) The same must be said if the father should appoint his two minor children
his heirs, and substitute them for one another, as under these circumstances
the estate will vest in the other by the right of substitution, and the amount
of the Falcidian Law must be established.
(7) Where a testator had two minor sons, and appointed one of them his heir,
and disinherited the other, and subsequently substituted the disinherited son
for the one whom he had appointed heir, and then substituted Msevius for the
one whom he had disinherited, and charged him with the payment of legacies, the
disinherited brother became the heir to the other, and afterwards died. As, by
his father's will, the estate of the latter passed to him by hereditary right
under the terms of the substitution, it can be said that the legacies with
which he was
charged must, after deducting the Falcidian portion, be paid out of the
property which the father left at the time of his death.
The following case is not opposed to this opinion, namely: when a father
bequeaths a legacy to his disinherited son, the substitute is not obliged to
pay the legacy on this account; because, in this instance, the son does not
receive a part of his father's estate but only a legacy. Still, someone may ask
what must be done if the disinherited son did not become the heir of his
brother under the substitution, either by law, or through the intervention of
some third party, and then should die before reaching the age of puberty. Could
it be held, under such circumstances, that the substitute must pay the legacy
with which he was charged? By no means. For it makes a difference whether the
disinherited son becomes the heir of his brother by virtue of the substitution
or in some other way, and it is clear that in one of these cases the father can
charge the son with a legacy, but in the other he cannot; and hence it is
agreeable to reason to hold that the testator has no more right with reference
to the substitute than he would have had with reference to him for whom he was
appointed.
(8) The co-heir of a minor, after reserving the Falcidian portion, paid the
legacies bequeathed by the testator in proportion to his share of the estate.
Then the minor having died, the other became his heir by virtue of the
substitution, and the half of the estate which belonged to the minor having
been exhausted, the portion due under the Falcidian Law should be deducted from
all the legacies, so that all of them with which he and the minor were charged
having been subjected to contribution, the fourth part of the estate will
remain in his possession; for although he is the heir of the minor, still the
deduction under the Falcidian Law must be made, just as if he had been the heir
of his
father.
The legacies with which the heir was charged, and which amounted to more than
three-fourths of his share, will not be increased unless the heir who was
appointed to a part of the estate and substituted for his co-heir, should pay
the legacies, after having deducted the Falcidian portion, while his co-heir
was deliberating; and then, after the latter had rejected the estate, the
other, by virtue of the substitution, should also acquire the remaining part of
the same.
88. Africanus, Questions, Book V.
Where a man, who had an estate of four hundred aurei,bequeathed three hundred
of them, and then devised to you a tract of land worth a hundred aureiunder the
condition that the Falcidian Law should not apply to his will, the question
arises, what is the rule? I replied that this is one of those perplexing
questions which are discussed by dialecticians, and are designated by them
sophistical, or illusory; for, in a case of this kind, whatever we may decide
to be true will be found to be false. For if we should say that the devise left
to you is valid, there will be ground for the application of the Falcidian Law,
and therefore the legacy will not be payable, as the condition has not been
fulfilled. Again, if the legacy should not be considered valid, because
the condition has not been complied with, there will be no ground for the
application of the Falcidian Law.
If, however, the law is not applicable, and the condition should be complied
with, you will be entitled to the devise. But as the intention of the testator
appears to have been that the other legacies should not Be diminished on
account of yours, the better opinion is to decide that the condition upon which
your legacy is dependent has not been fulfilled.
(1) Therefore, what shall we say if the testator bequeathed two hundred aureiin
other legacies, and left you two hundred under the same condition, for the
condition upon which your legacy is dependent either was, or was not fulfilled;
hence you will be entitled to all of it, or to none, and this will be
considered unjust, and contrary to the intention of the testator.
Again, it is not reasonable to hold that you are entitled to a part of the
legacy, when it is necessary for the condition on which the entire legacy
depends either must have been fulfilled, or must have failed. Therefore the
whole matter should be disposed of by having recourse to an exception based on
fraud.
(2) For which reason, when a testator desires to obtain compliance with his
wishes, he should provide as follows: &quot;If I have bequeathed, or should
bequeath anything more than is legal under the Falcidian Law, let my heir be
charged to deduct as much as is necessary to make up his fourth out of the
legacy which I have left to Titius.&quot;
(3) Where a testator left an estate of two hundred aurei,and bequeathed to me a
hundred payable immediately, and also a hundred to you payable conditionally,
and the condition was complied with after some time, in such a way, however,
that out of the income which was left to you the heir did not receive more than
twenty-five aurei,he will be entitled to the benefit of the Falcidian Law, and
we must pay him twenty-five, and, in addition to this, the interest on fifty
during the meantime, which (for example) amounts to five aurei.Therefore, as
thirty aureimust be paid, certain authorities hold that fifteen shall be due
from each of us, which opinion is entirely incorrect; for although we have each
received the same amount, it is still evident that my legacy is somewhat more
valuable than yours. Hence, it should be decided that your legacy is diminished
by the amount that the heir has received from the profits; and according to
this, the following computation should be made, namely, what is due to the heir
must be divided into seven parts of which I will be required to pay four, and
you three, since my legacy is a fourth larger than yours.
89. Marcianus, Institutes, Book VII.
The Divine Severus and Antoninus stated in a Rescript that money left for the
support of children was subject to the operation of the Falcidian Law, and that
it was the duty of the Governor of the Province to see that it was lent to
persons who were solvent.
(1) The Divine Severus and Antoninus stated in a general Rescript, addressed to
Bononius Maximus, that interest should be paid by
anyone who claimed the benefit of the Falcidian Law for the purpose of
committing fraud.
90. Florentinus, Institutes, Book XI.
Where an heir, who was charged by a trust to transfer the estate to someone
after the receipt of a certain sum of money, refuses to carry out the will of
the testator, and afterwards desires to avail himself of the benefit of the
Falcidian Law, even though the money may not have been paid to him who, on
receipt of it, was asked to transfer the estate; still, he will be compelled to
execute the trust, since what the testator wished to be given him will take the
place of the Falcidian portion.
91. Marcianus, Institutes, Book XIII.
An heir is entitled to have, as a fourth of the estate under the Falcidian Law,
all that he acquires in this capacity, but not any property which he can claim
by hereditary right, or which he received as a legacy, or by virtue of a trust,
or in order to comply with a condition; for none of these things are included
in his fourth.
But where he is charged under the terms of a trust to transfer the entire
estate, or where either a legacy is left him, or he becomes the beneficiary of
a trust, or where he is directed to take certain property as a preferred
legacy, or to deduct or retain anything from the estate, this will be included
in his fourth. With reference, however, to the share which he receives from his
co-heir, this will not be included.
Even though he may be requested to transfer the estate on receipt of a certain
sum of money, what he receives shall be included in his fourth, as has been
decided by the Divine Pius. And where anything is given to him by the
beneficiary of the trust in compliance with a condition, it should be noted
that this must also be included in his fourth. But if the heir should receive
anything from the legatee for the purpose of fulfilling a condition, this does
not come within the scope of the Falcidian Law; therefore, if the deceased
devised a tract of land worth a hundred aurei,provided the devisee paid fifty
to the heir, the legacies should be counted as a hundred, and the heir will be
entitled to fifty, in addition to his share of the estate, and this will not be
included in his fourth.
92. Macer, On Military Affairs, Book II.
If a soldier, having made his will, directs half of his estate to be delivered
to you, and then executes a codicil after he has been discharged, by which he
requests the other half of his estate to be delivered to Titius, and dies a
year after his discharge, the heir shall retain his fourth out of what was due
to yourself and Titius; because the testator died at a time when his will could
not receive the benefit of the Imperial privilege relating to military wills.
If, however, he should die within a year after his discharge, Titius alone must
suffer the deduction of the Falcidian fourth, because the trust was left to him
at a time when the testator could not make a will under military law.
93. Papiniamis, Questions, Book XX.
An heir was charged to transfer an estate to Maevius on condition of his
receiving a hundred aureifrom him, and at his death, to leave the money to
Titius. Although the said hundred aureiwere sufficient to compose a fourth of
the estate, still, because of the subsequent trust, there will be ground for
the retention of a fourth of the first bequest; for, according to a
Constitution of the Divine Hadrian, the amount only comes within the terms of
the Falcidian Law where it remains in the hands of the heir; but he alone is
subject to the operation of the Falcidian Law to whom the estate was
bequeathed, hence it does not apply to the hundred aureiwhich were donated
mortis causa.
It is clear that, if anyone should make the following testamentary provision,
&quot;I ask you to transfer my estate on the receipt of a hundred
aurei,&quot;and the testator should not designate any person to pay the money,
it can be retained and deducted by the heir under the terms of the Trebellian
Decree of the Senate, if it is sufficient to make up his fourth.
94. Scsevola, Digest, Book XXI.
Atestator, after having appointed his son and daughter his heirs, bequeathed
certain property to each of them as preferred legacies, but he left much less
to his daughter than to his son. He devised to the former, in addition, a house
which was encumbered, including everything belonging to it and all its
utensils, and added the following clause, &quot;I make this devise on condition
that Titius, the freedman of my son, shall pay any debts due on said house, and
if he does, the house shall belong to both of them in common.&quot;
If the daughter should desire to avail herself of the benefit of the Falcidian
Law for the purpose of reserving her fourth, the question arose whether the
debts should be deducted from the share of the estate which was left to her,
and she should obtain her fourth out of what was left. The answer was that she
could claim it by law, but that she could not accept what was left to her, if
it was sufficient to make up her fourth, without complying with the wishes of
the deceased, and paying what she had been charged with.
95. The Same, Digest, Book XXI.
A husband had charge of the property of his wife, which did not include her
dowry, and she, having died before her husband had rendered her an account of
his administration, left him heir to her entire estate, and charged him, when
he died, to deliver ten shares of the same to their common son, and to deliver
two shares to her grandson. The question arose whether what was found to have
remained in the hands of her husband from his administration of the property
should be transferred to the son, along with the other assets, in proportion to
ten shares of the estate. The answer was that what the husband owed the estate
would also be included in the distribution.
(1) The paternal uncle of a girl, whom her mother requested to transfer her
estate to Titius, if she should die before reaching the age
of puberty, became her legal heir. In estimating the amount due under the
Falcidian Law, the heir desired to deduct from the estate the principal, out of
the interest of which the deceased minor had paid several persons money that
was due for support furnished on account of the testatrix. If he should make
this deduction, the question arose whether he ought to give security to pay the
principal of said sums of money, the amounts of the same to be determined by
the time of death of each of the parties entitled to support. The answer was
that he should give such security.
(2) Three years after having entered upon the estate an heir wished to enforce
the Falcidian Law against the legatees, for the reason that the testator had
administered certain guardianships of which no account had yet been rendered,
and because he denied that as much could be recovered from the claims due to
the minor as had been deducted on account of the security given by the
testator. The question arose whether on the demand of the legatees copies
should be taken of the accounts of the deceased, and of all the documents
belonging to the estate, as well as a statement of the sums due to the wards,
in order to prevent the heir from producing what papers he might select, and in
this way defraud the legatees. The answer was that it was the duty of the court
to examine any documents by which the amount of the estate might be
established.
96. The Same, Questions, Publicly Discussed.
If a civilian executed a will before he becomes a soldier, and then executes a
codicil during his time of military service, the Falcidian Law does not apply
to the codicil, but it does apply to the will.
TITLE III.
WHERE MORE Is SAID TO HAVE BEEN BEQUEATHED TO ANYONE THAN Is PERMITTED BY THE
FALCIDIAN LAW.
1. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXIX.
Where more property is bequeathed to anyone than is permitted by law, and there
is good reason to doubt whether the Falcidian Law is applicable or not, the
Praetor will come to the relief of the heir, and compel the legatee to furnish
him with security that, if it should become apparent that he has received a
larger legacy than he is entitled to under the Falcidian Law, he will refund to
him an amount equal to the excess, and that no attempt will be made to defraud
him.
(1) It makes no difference whether this occurs in the first will, in the
pupillary substitution, or in both, for it has already been decided that the
Falcidian Law applies but once, even where there are two wills, and that all
the legacies will be subject to contribution, not only those with which the
minor himself is charged, but also those which his substitute is obliged to
pay.
(2) Where no stipulation has been entered into with reference to the ward, the
heir will be entitled to an action on guardianship against
the guardian of the former. But, as Pomponius says, the stipulation can take
effect with reference to both the ward himself and his heir, in which case the
Falcidian Law will begin to become operative during his lifetime.
He also lays down the same rule with reference to the action on guardianship.
(3) Marcellus says that a man whose estate amounted to four hundred
aureiappointed as his heir his son, who had not yet reached the age of puberty,
substituted Titius and Seius for him, and did not charge the minor with any
legacy, but charged Titius with the payment of three hundred aurei.Marcellus
asks whether two hundred or a hundred and fifty aureishould be paid by the
substitute, as, under no circumstances, he should be compelled to pay three
hundred.
It seems to me to be the better opinion that he ought not to be obliged to pay
the legatees more than his share, and certainly he ought not to pay them less.
It follows, according to this, that the stipulation does not take effect, so
far as he alone is concerned, but it should be carried out for the benefit of
all the heirs, since the Falcidian Law becomes applicable after proper cause
has been shown, and is determined by the amount of the legacies and the debts
of the estate.
(4) If the indebtedness of the estate is evident, or certain, the calculation
is easily made. If, however, the indebtedness is still uncertain, either
because it is dependent upon some condition, or the creditor has brought an
action to collect his claim, and the litigation has not yet been terminated, it
will be doubtful how much is payable to the legatee on account of the
uncertainty.
(5) At the present day something very similar to this occurs with reference to
trusts.
(6) When it is said that the Falcidian Law is applicable, an arbiter is usually
appointed to appraise the amount of the estate, even though there may be only
one person demanding the execution of a very moderate trust. An appraisement of
this kind should not prejudice others who have not been summoned before the
arbiter. Still, it is usual for the other beneficiaries of the trust to be
notified by the heir to appear before the arbiter and state their cases there.
The creditors, frequently, are also notified to prove their claims before the
arbiter. It is but reasonable that the heir should be heard against the claims
of the legatees and beneficiaries of the trust, if he should offer to pay all
that is left, and desires to protect himself by a stipulation of this kind.
(7) Where certain legacies are bequeathed that are payable immediately, and
others that are payable under a condition, this stipulation should be entered
into with reference to the conditional legacies, provided those which are
immediately due are fully paid.
Finally, Julianus says that where legacies are bequeathed absolutely and
conditionally, in order to prevent the Falcidian Law from taking effect if the
condition is complied with, an action will not be granted for the collection of
the legacies which have been absolutely bequeathed, unless security is given to
the heir to refund anything
which has been received in excess of what is permitted by the Falcidian Law.
(8) Julianus also says that where a fourth of an estate is left to a person
under a condition, and three-fourths of it is bequeathed absolutely, security
must be given to refund all that has been received above the amount authorized
by the Falcidian Law.
(9) Hence this stipulation also can be exacted, because, although the heir can
recover any excess which he has paid, still, the party to whom payment was made
may not prove to be solvent, and for this reason what has been paid will be
lost.
(10) It can be said that this stipulation should also be entered into with
reference to donations mortis causa.
(11) These words of the stipulation, &quot;What you may have received as
legacies in excess of what is authorized by the Falcidian Law,&quot; not only
refer to one who has received more than is permitted by the Falcidian Law, and
who must refund a part, and can retain a part of the same, but they also have
reference to a person who is obliged to refund his entire legacy, for it should
be understood that sometimes the Falcidian Law revokes a portion of the legacy
which has been paid, and sometimes revokes all of it. For, as the calculation
of the Falcidian portion is made after an account of the indebtedness has been
taken, it frequently happens that other indebtedness is discovered, or a
condition is fulfilled upon which the payment of a debt depended, and the
entire amount of the legacy is exhausted; sometimes, however, a condition is
fulfilled upon which the freedom of slaves depends, which renders a legacy not
due under any circumstances, since the calculation of the amount of the
legacies is not made until that of the slave has been completed, and their
value deducted from the assets of the estate.
(12) Moreover, the Falcidian Law does not apply to certain wills; still, with
reference to them, the rule is observed that although the heir may not be
entitled to reserve his fourth, yet the legacies would only be payable in case
the assets of the estate should be sufficient, of course, after deducting the
indebtedness, as well as the value of the slaves who have received their
freedom by the will either directly, or under the terms of a trust.
(13) Security should also be given by the beneficiary of a trust to the legatee
who is charged with the execution of the same.
(14) Sometimes, the agreement set forth in this stipulation has reference not
to the Falcidian, but to some other law; as, for instance, where a patron is
appointed heir to an entire estate, and is charged absolutely with a legacy of
five-twelfths of the same, and is afterwards charged conditionally with another
bequest in excess of the amount to which he is entitled as patron; for in this
instance recourse must be had to that law which provides for patrons, and not
to the Falcidian Law.
(15) Where property which has been bequeathed is lost while in the hands of the
legatee, the better opinion is that relief should be
granted, by means of an exception, to the party who made the promise,
2. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LXXV.
Even if he consented to pay the value of the property,
3. Ulpianus, On the Edict, Book LXXIX.
Unless some fraudulent act was committed by the legatee himself, for then he
will also be liable under the clause relating to bad faith, which is included
in this stipulation, and can be opposed by a reply.
(1) This bond, which is executed on account of the Falcidian Law, has reference
to the furnishing of sureties.
(2) Where legacies are bequeathed which are payable at different times, as it
is certain that the Falcidian Law will be applicable, Pedius says that there is
no ground for a stipulation, but there is one for a calculation, and that an
estimate should be made of the sum payable at different times, and in this way
the total amount of the legacies will be established.
The result of the estimate is that the amount due under the Falcidian Law will
be fixed in proportion to what is to be deducted from all the legacies.
(3) Whenever it is clear that a legacy will be due and payable even before the
time the Falcidian Law will begin to apply, the calculation of the legacy must
be made. If, however, fulfillment of the condition upon which it depends is
delayed, we must wait until it is complied with. But where the time for its
fulfillment has not yet arrived, in this instance, an account should be taken
of the profits received during the intermediate time, and an estimate made, so
that we can determine the amount under the Falcidian Law, and can say that the
stipulation has become operative.
(4) Although all legatees and beneficiaries of a trust may by means of this
stipulation be obliged to give security, still, the Divine Brothers stated in a
Rescript that some of them are excused from doing so, as, for instance, those
to whom small allowances for support have been bequeathed. For they stated in a
Rescript, addressed to Pompeius Faustina: &quot;The bequest of the ten
aureipayable annually under the will of Pompeia Crispiana, your patroness,
which you allege have been left to you, is different from that by which food
and clothing were left to her other freedwomen, for which reason we think that
a bond should not be required.&quot;
(5) Moreover, it should be noted that the Treasury ought not to be required to
furnish security, but an action can be brought against it, just as if it had
done so. Still, the Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that others, no matter
what their rank, and though they may have already received their legacies,
should be compelled to give security. We also learn from this Rescript that the
Emperor intended that a stipulation should be entered into, even after the
legacies have been paid.
(6) When a legatee has given security to an heir with reference to the return
of the legacy which has been paid to him, and the heir
fs already involved in a controversy on account of the estate, or expects to
be, and the estate is evicted, either on account of the negligence or fraud of
him who paid the legacy, we hold that the stipulation will not take effect, so
far as the judgment of a good citizen is concerned, because it contains the
element of good faith.
(7) Likewise, if he who paid the legacy should, for some other reason, deprive
himself of the estate (for instance, because he is appointed heir by a second
will, under which the said legatee did not receive the legacy), we say that, in
accordance with the judgment of a good citizen, the stipulation will become
operative.
(8) And, generally speaking, where he who provided for himself by a stipulation
of this kind, and has transferred an estate, or a sum of money, or some
advantage, it must be said that the stipulation will take effect; provided he
who entered into it was not guilty of bad
faith.
(9) The question arose whether the stipulation can take effect more than once.
And it is established that it can take effect repeatedly, if the heir is
deprived of different parts of the estate at different times.
(10) If the legacy should be paid before the stipulation is entered into, and
legal proceedings are instituted to compel security to be furnished, this
suggests the point that proceedings can be instituted where anything has been
omitted, or paid through mistake. Therefore, in this instance, as no security
was given, more is considered to have been paid than is due.
Pomponius says that an action to compel security to be furnished will lie, and
I think that his opinion should be adopted on account of the benefit to be
derived from it.
4. Paulus, On the Edict, Book LXX11L
Again, this security must be given where there appears to be good reason for
it, as it would be unjust for it to be required where no controversy has as yet
arisen with reference to the estate, and where only idle threats have been
made, and therefore the Prastor must decide the question after proper
investigation.
(1) Where each of two parties claims the entire estate for himself, under the
will, for example, where they are both of the same name, actions can be brought
by the creditors as well as the legatees against both the party in possession,
and the one who demands the estate.
(2) This security is necessary where anyone pays his own money or delivers his
own property. If he pays money or delivers property belonging to the estate,
some authorities hold that security need not be furnished, for if he loses his
case he will not be liable, since he was not in possession and did not commit
fraud to avoid having possession.
If he should make payment before any controversy has arisen, this rule will
apply; because if he made payment afterwards he would be liable on the ground
of negligence.
(3) In the case of two persons having the same name, the question arises
whether security must be furnished by him who transfers the
property of the estate, for the reason that one of them is absolutely released
from liability, just as if he had paid a debt due from the estate. If the party
claiming the estate paid his own money, or delivered his own property, he will
not have anything to retain, and therefore a bond must be given him.
5. Marcellus, Digest, Book XXI.
Let us see whether this stipulation, namely, &quot;Do you promise to return
whatever you may have received above what is allowed by the Falcidian
Law?&quot; will not be sufficient as against the party who is obliged to pay a
legacy to another under the terms of a trust. It will be sufficient for the
heir to say that there is nothing to be done by him under the trust. For, in
this case also, he who receives the benefit of the trust must furnish security
to indemnify the legatee, unless the latter should prefer to give security to
the heir in order to avoid circumlocution.
Moreover, security must be given to the legatee if (as is perfectly proper), he
should be permitted to retain a proportionate sum out of what was paid under
the trust, even though enough of the legacy may remain in his hands to
discharge the entire fiduciary obligation.
6. Callistratus, On Judicial Inquiries, Book IV.
If the legatee or the beneficiary of the trust cannot readily furnish security,
and for this reason runs the risk of being deprived of the benefit conferred by
the will, shall he be released from the necessity of giving security? This
opinion seems to be adopted in a Rescript of the Divine Commodus, which is in
the following words: &quot;If the court having jurisdiction of the case should
ascertain that application has been made to him to compel you to give security
in order to prevent you from claiming the benefit of the trust, he must see
that you are released from the requirement of furnishing it.&quot;
7. Paulus, On the Lex Julia et Papia, Book VII.
The Divine Pius forbade security from being exacted from a person who was
directed to oversee the distribution of certain annual legacies, requiring him
to return to the heir the shares of those who failed to accept them, unless he
was expressly ordered to do so by the testator.
8. Marcianus, Trusts, Book X.
Where an heir alleges that part of an estate, or even all of it, is forfeited
to the Treasury, and it should be established that he was also charged with a
trust, it was decided that if the beneficiary should give security to restore
the estate in case it should be evicted, he must be paid.
9. The Same, Trusts, Book XII.
When the ownership of property is not in controversy, but the usufruct of the
same is (for it may happen that the ownership is be-
queathed to Titius, and the usufruct to someone else), then security to restore
it should not be given to th'e heir, but to Titius.
Sometimes, even if the heir is charged with the transfer of the usufruct,
security should be given to Titius; for instance, if the usufruct, having been
reserved, the ownership is left to him, and the usufruct to Seius; for, in this
instance, what advantage would it be for security to be given to the heir,
since no benefit will accrue to him if the usufruct should be extinguished?
If, however, the usufruct, having been bequeathed to Seius, and the ownership
is left to Titius in such a way that when the usufruct ceases to belong to
Seius, he will be entitled to the ownership, then security must be furnished to
the heir by the usufructuary, and also by the heir to Titius, because it is not
certain that, if the usufruct should be extinguished, the ownership will be
acquired by Titius.

