# -*- mode: org -*-

II.

THE INSTITUTES OF GAIUS.

THE FOUR COMMENTARIES OF GAIUS ON THE INSTITUTES OF THE CIVIL LAW

FIRST COMMENTARY.

I. CONCERNING CIVIL AND NATURAL LAW.

​(1) All peoples who are ruled by laws and customs partly make use of
their own laws, and partly have recourse to those which are common to
all men; for what every people establishes as law for itself is peculiar
to itself, and is called the Civil Law, as being that peculiar to the
State; and what natural reason establishes among all men and is observed
by all peoples alike, is called the Law of Nations, as being the law
which all nations employ. Therefore the Roman people partly make use of
their own law, and partly avail themselves of that common to all men,
which matters we shall explain separately in their proper place.^[1]^

​(2) The Civil Law of the Roman people consists of statutes,
plebiscites, Decrees of the Senate, Constitutions of the Emperors, the
Edicts of those who have the right to promulgate them, and the opinions
of jurists.

^[1]^ With the Romans the *Jus Gentium* and the *Jus Naturale* were
practically synonymous. The greater number of ancient authorities made
two divisions of jurisprudence, the Law of Nations and the Civil Law;
some added another, the *Jus Privatum*, or *Familiæ*, that is to say,
private law.

The precepts of morality, as in most human enactments, form the basis of
this most comprehensive system of jurisprudence which all civilized
peoples are presumed to acknowledge.

By what we designate the Law of Nature, the Roman jurists understood the
rules by which all living beings were governed: "*Quod natura omnia
animalia docuit*." The Law of Nations was known to them as *Jus
Feciale*.

No lawyer of ancient or modern times has given such a lucid,
comprehensive, and eloquent description of the Law of Nature as Cicero.
In glowing language, eminently worthy of the distinguished scholar and
jurist, he sets forth its constant and universal blessings; a law which
summons all to the performance of their duties, and deters the
hesitating from the commission of fraud; from whose observance even
those highest in authority are not exempt; whose application is
universal; whose precepts are eternal and immutable; which cannot be
disregarded or abrogated with impunity; of which God is the originator,
the interpreter, the proposer; and he who refuses to obey it flees from
himself, and rejects the claims of humanity, by this very act rendering
himself liable to the severest penalties, even if he be able to escape
others which have been prescribed.

"*Est quidem vera lex recta ratio, naturæ congruens, diffusa in omnes,
conBlans, sempiterna; quæ vocet ad officium jubendo, vetando a fraude
deterreat, quæ tamen neque probos frustra jubet aut vetat, neque
improbos jubendo aut vetando movet. Huic legi neque obrogari fas est,
neque derogari ex hac aliquid licet, neque tota abrogari potest. Nec
vero aut per senatum aut per populum solvi hac lege possumus: neque est
quærendus explanator aut interpres ejus alius. Nec frit alia lex Romæ,
alia Athenis, alia nunc, alia posthac; sed et omnes gentes et*

​(3) A statute is what the people order and establish. A plebiscite is
what the commonalty order and establish. Moreover, the commonalty is
distinguished from the people by the fact that the entire body of
citizens including the patricians, is designated by the appellation,
"the people"; but the other citizens, exclusive of the patricians, are
indicated by the term commonalty; for which reason the patricians
formerly declared that they were not bound by plebiscites, as they were
enacted without their sanction; but subsequently the *Lex Hortensia* was
passed, by which it was provided that plebiscites should bind the entire
people; and hence, in this way, they were placed on the same footing as
laws.

​(4) A Decree of the Senate is what the Senate orders and establishes,
and therefore it obtains the force of law, although this formerly was
disputed.

​(5) An Imperial Constitution is what the Emperor establishes by a
decree, an edict, or a letter, and there was never any doubt that it had
the force of a law, as the Emperor himself derives his authority from a
statute.

​(6) The magistrates of the Roman people have the power of promulgating
edicts, but the highest authority attaches to the edicts of the two
prætors, the urban and the foreign, whose jurisdiction is vested in the
governors of the provinces; as well as to the edicts of the curule
Ædiles, whose jurisdiction the quæstors administer in the provinces of
the Roman people, for quæstors are not appointed in the provinces of the
Emperor and, therefore, the latter edict is not published in these
provinces.

​(7) The answers of jurists are the decisions and opinions of those who
are authorized to define the law. If the opinions of all of them

*omni tempore una lex et sempiterna, et immutabilis continebit; unusque
erit communis quasi magister et imperator omnium Deus, ille legis hujus
inventor, disceptator, lator: cui qui non parebit ipse se fugiet et
naturam hominis aspernabitur, atque hoc ipse luet maximas pœnas, etiamsi
cætera, supplicia, quæ putantur, effugerit*." (De Repub. lib. III, cap.
22.)

The importance of considering man as an individual, distinct from his
association with his fellows in communities, is emphasized by
Montesquieu in determining the principles of the Law of Nature.

"*Avant toutes ces lois sont celles de la nature, ainsi nommées parce
qu'elles dérivent uniquement de la constitution de notre être. Pour les
connaître bien, il faut considérer un homme evant l'établissement des
sociétés. Les lois de la nature seront celles qu'il recevroit dans un
état pareil*."

"*Il songeroit à la conservation de son être, avant de chercher
l'origine de son être." (De l'Esprit des Lois*, I, II, Page 191.)

The Law of Nations he concisely states to be based upon the bestowal of
the greatest benefits in peace and the infliction of the least injury in
war consistent with the public interests involved.

"*Le droit des gens est naturellement fondé sur ce principe, que les
diverses nations doivent se faire dans la paix le plus de bien, et dans
la guerre le moins de mal qu'il est possible, sans nuire à leurs
véritables intérêts." (Ibid* I, II, 191.)

No ancient classic work on the Law of Nations has survived, if, indeed,
one ever was written. The formulation and perfection of its rules as a
science were worthily accomplished by the genius, learning,
philosophical discernment, and industry of Grotius, Pufendorf, and
Vattel. — ed.

concur, what they agree upon obtains the force of law; if, however, they
disagree, the judge has a right to follow whichever opinion he may wish,
and this is set forth in a rescript of the Divine Hadrian.^[1]^

​II. CONCERNING THE DIVISIONS OF THE LAW.

​(8) All the law which we make use of has reference either to persons,
to things, or to actions. Let us first consider persons.

​III. CONCERNING THE DIFFERENT CONDITIONS OF MEN.

​(9) The principal division of the law of persons is the following,
namely, that all men are either free or slaves.

​(10) Again, men who are free are either freeborn or freedmen.

​(11) Freeborn are those who are free by birth, freedmen are those who
have been manumitted from legal slavery.

​(12) Moreover, there are three classes of freedmen, namely, Roman
citizens, Latins, and *dediticii*. Let us consider each of these
separately, and, in the first place, *dediticii*.

​IV. CONCERNING DEDITICII AND THE PROVISIONS OF THE LEX ÆLIA SENTIA.

​(13) It is provided by the *Lex Ælia Sentia* that slaves who have been
placed in chains by their masters, or have been branded, or have been
subjected to torture for some offence and convicted, or have been
delivered up to fight with others or with wild beasts, or to contend
with gladiators, or have been thrown into prison and have afterwards
been manumitted by the same, or by another master, shall become free,
and belong to the same class as that of enemies who have surrendered at
discretion.

^[1]^ The *Responsa Prudentum* were at first only the opinions of
eminent lawyers imparted to anyone who consulted them. Subsequently, by
decrees of Augustus and other sovereigns, they were invested with legal
validity, and obtained all the force of regularly enacted statutes. They
were directly addressed to the judge, or, having been reduced to
writing, were submitted to the court in the presence of witnesses who
had seen them drawn up. The *Responsa* formed one of the most important
sources from whence was derived the maxims and principles of the Civil
Law, and indeed, of all modern jurisprudence. The Digest is largely
composed of them. From the fragments it contains we can form some idea
of the vast knowledge and attainments possessed by these old Roman
lawyers, whose works have perished, and whose names would hardly be
known, were it not for the compilation of Justinian. As legal dicta they
are, as a rule, models of perspicacity and conciseness. Their language
is terse, comprehensive, elegant. The ingenuity with which their
conclusions are formed is admirable. The dominating sentiments which
pervade them are a love of truth and a reverence for justice, qualities,
it is scarcely necessary to add, which do not always characterize modern
legislation.

These opinions, originally intended to mitigate the severity of the
Civil Law, whose basis was the harsh and inflexible collection of the
Twelve Tables, by enabling the magistrate to modify his decisions, and
evade the cruel legislation of a barbarous age, laid the foundation of
equity jurisprudence. After the *Responsa* had, by Imperial sanction and
general acceptance, acquired full legal effect, they were designated
*sententiæ receptæ. —* ed.

V. CONCERNING ENEMIES WHO HAVE SURRENDERED AT DISCRETION.

​(14) Those enemies are called *dediticii* who, having formerly taken up
arms and fought against the Roman people afterwards have been conquered
and have surrendered at discretion.

​(15) From this it is evident that slaves who have been guilty of
criminal acts of this kind, no matter in what way, or at what age they
may have been manumitted, and even though their masters had complete
authority over them, can never become either Roman citizens or Latins,
but must always be classed among enemies who have surrendered at
discretion.

​(16) If, however, a slave has not been guilty of such criminality, we
declare that by manumission he sometimes becomes a Roman citizen, and
sometimes a Latin.

​(17) Where the following three requisites are combined in the person of
a slave, that is to say where he is over thirty years of age, where his
master is invested with full civil rights, and he is set free by proper
and lawful manumission through the intervention of the prætor, by
enrollment on the register of the census, or by will, he becomes a Roman
citizen; if, however, one of these requisites should be lacking, he will
become a Latin.

​VI. CONCERNING MANUMISSION, AND PROOF OF THE REASON FOR IT.

​(18) The requisite of the age of the slave was introduced by the *Lex
Ælia Sentia*, for this law did not permit slaves under the age of thirty
years, who had been manumitted, to become Roman citizens unless they
were set free by the wand of the prætor, after proof of good reason for
the manumission had been established in the presence of the Council.

​(19) A good reason for manumission exists where, for instance, anyone
offers for manumission before the Council a natural son or daughter, or
brother or sister, or foster-child or teacher, or a slave with the
intention of appointing him a steward, or a female slave on account of
prospective marriage.

​VII. CONCERNING THE CONSTITUTION OF THE COUNCIL.

​(20) The Council in the City of Rome consists of five senators and five
Roman knights of the age of puberty. In the provinces it consists of
twenty magistrates who are Roman citizens, and who are convoked on the
last day of the term. At Rome, however, manumissions take place in the
presence of the Council upon certain days. Slaves who are more than
thirty years of age can be manumitted at any time, and the ceremony can
be performed even while walking in the streets, as for instance, when
the prætor or the proconsul is on his way to the bath or the theatre.

​(21) A slave, who was under the age of thirty years when manumitted,
can become a Roman citizen if he was granted his freedom and appointed
heir by the will of his master who died insolvent. . . .^[1]^

​(22) Slaves manumitted in certain ways are called *Latini Juniani;
Latini* for the reason that they are classed with Latin colonists,
*Juniani* because they received their freedom under the terms of the
*Lex Junia*, as before it was passed they were considered slaves.

​(23) The *Lex Junia* does not, however, permit them either to make a
will, or to take under the will of another, or to be appointed
testamentary guardians.

​(24) What we have said with reference to their being unable to take
under a will must be understood to mean that they cannot take anything
directly as heirs, or legatees, but, on the other hand, they have a
right to take under the terms of a trust.

​(25) Those, however, who belong to the class of *dediticii* can, under
no circumstances, take under a will, any more than a foreigner; nor can
they, in accordance with a majority of the decisions, themselves make a
will.

​(26) Hence, only the lowest degree of freedom is possessed by those who
belong to the class of *dediticii* nor is any way afforded them of
obtaining Roman citizenship either by a law, by a Decree of the Senate,
or by an Imperial Constitution.

​(27) Moreover, they are forbidden to dwell in the City of Rome or
within the hundredth mile-stone of the Capitol; and if they should
disobey, they and their property are ordered to be publicly sold under
the condition that they shall remain slaves beyond the hundredth
milestone of the City of Rome, and that they shall never be manumitted;
and if they should be manumitted, they are ordered to become the slaves
of the Roman people; and these things are included in the *Lex Ælia
Sentia*.

IN WHAT WAY LATINS MAY OBTAIN ROMAN CITIZENSHIP.

​(28) Latins obtain Roman citizenship in many ways.

​(29) For, by the *Lex Ælia Sentia*, where slaves under the age of
thirty years are manumitted and become Latins, if they marry either
women who are Roman citizens or Latin colonists, or those who belong to
the same condition as themselves, and prove this by the testimony of not
less than seven Roman citizens who have arrived at the age of puberty;
and they have sons, and the latter are a year old, authority is granted
them by this law to appear before the prætor — or, in the provinces
before the governor — and prove that they have married wives in
accordance with the terms of the *Lex Ælia Sentia*, and have sons by
them who are a year old; and if the magistrate before whom this proof is
adduced should declare it to be true, then the Latin and his wife,
provided she and her son are of the same condition, are ordered to
become Roman citizens.

​(30) I added the clause, "If the son is of the same condition", for the
reason that if the wife of the Latin aforesaid is a Roman citizen, her
son is a Roman citizen by birth under the terms of the recent Decree of
the Senate promulgated by the Divine Hadrian.

^[1]^ Original manuscript illegible.

​(31) This right of acquiring Roman citizenship, though at first only
conferred upon those who had been manumitted under thirty years of age
and had become Latins by the *Lex Ælia Sentia*, was afterwards, by a
Decree of the Senate issued under the consulship of Pegasus and Pusio,
granted to all Latins, even though they were more than thirty years of
age at the time when they were manumitted.

​(32) However, even if the Latin should die before he was able to prove
that his son was a year old, the mother of the latter can prove his
condition, and hence both she and her son (if she is a Latin) will
become Roman citizens. If the mother should not be able to prove this,
the son himself can do so when he reaches the age of puberty. If the son
himself is a Roman citizen, for the reason that he is born of a mother
who is a Roman citizen, he must still prove his condition in order to
become the heir of his father.

(32a) What we have stated with reference to a son being a year old we
also understood to apply to a daughter of the same age.

(32b) Moreover, by the *Lex Visellia*, persons become Roman citizens,
where by manumission they have become Latins, when either under or over
thirty years of age, if they have served for six years in the guards at
Rome. A Decree of the Senate is said to have been subsequently enacted
by which Roman citizenship was bestowed on Latins if they had served for
three years in the army.

(32c) Likewise, by an Edict of the Divine Claudius, Latins obtain the
rights of Roman citizens if they build a ship with a capacity not less
than ten thousand measures of grain, and the said ship, or one
substituted for it, should transport grain to Rome for the term of six
years.

​(33) Moreover, it was established in an Edict published by Nero that if
a Latin who had property worth two hundred thousand sesterces, or more,
should build a house in the City of Rome on which he expended not less
than half his estate, he should obtain the right of Roman citizenship.

​(34) Finally, the Divine Trajan decreed that if a Latin should exercise
the calling of a miller in the City of Rome for the term of three years,
and should grind each day not less than a hundred measures of grain, he
could acquire Roman citizenship.

​(35) Slaves who become Latins either because they are under thirty
years of age when manumitted, or, being over that age, have been
informally manumitted, may become Roman citizens by being again
manumitted either by the wand of the prætor, or by inscription on the
register of the census, or by will; and in either of these cases they
become the freedmen of the party who manumitted them a second time.
Therefore, if a slave forms part of your property by bonitarian right
and belongs to me by quiritarian right, he can be made a Latin solely by
you, and he can be manumitted a second time by me but not by you, and in
this way he will become my freedman; and if he obtains the right of
citizenship in other ways he still will be my freedman.

The possession of his estate at the time of his death is however granted
to you, no matter in what way he may have obtained Roman citizenship.
But, if he is manumitted by one who has in him both bonitarian and
quiritarian rights he can be manumitted by the said party, and become
both a Latin and a Roman citizen.

​(36) Every one who desires to manumit a slave is not permitted to do
so.

​(37) For he who manumits a slave for the purpose of defrauding his
creditors or his patron, commits an act which is void, for the reason
that the *Lex Ælia Sentia* prevents the grant of freedom.

​(38) Likewise, by the same law a minor owner under the age of twenty
years is not permitted to manumit a slave, except by the intervention of
the prætor, after proper cause has been shown for the manumission in the
presence of the Council.

​(39) The following are proper causes for manumission, for instance,
where anyone manumits his father, his mother, his teacher, or his
foster-brother. Moreover, the reasons which we have designated above
with reference to a slave under thirty years of age may be adduced also
in the case of which we speak; and likewise, on the other hand, the same
reasons which we stated with reference to an owner under the age of
twenty years may be advanced where the slave is less than thirty years
old.

​(40) Therefore, as a certain restriction on the manumission of slaves
is imposed upon owners under the age of twenty years by the *Lex Ælia
Sentia*, the result is that anyone who has completed his fourteenth
year, although he can make a will, appoint an heir to his estate, and
bequeath legacies, still, if he is under the age of twenty years, he
cannot grant freedom to his slave.

​(41) And even though an owner under the age of twenty years may desire
to constitute a slave a Latin, he must, nevertheless, prove before the
Council, that he has a good reason for doing so, and afterwards manumit
the said slave in the presence of friends.

​(42) Moreover, by the *Lex Fufia Caninia* a certain limit is
established with reference to the manumission of slaves by a will.

​(43) Hence, he who has more than two slaves and not more than ten, is
permitted to manumit as many as half of that number. He, however, who
has more than ten and not more than thirty slaves, is permitted to
manumit a third of that number; and he who has more than thirty slaves
and not more than a hundred, is granted authority to manumit one fourth
of his slaves. Finally, he who has more than one hundred and not more
than five hundred, is not permitted to manumit more than a fifth; and,
no matter how many slaves a man may have, he is not permitted to manumit
more than this, as the law prescribes that no one shall have the right
to manumit more than a hundred. Still, where anyone has only one or two
slaves, his case does not come under this law, and therefore he has free
power of manumission.

​(44) Nor does this law have any reference whatever to persons who
manumit in any way except by will, and therefore those who do so either
in the tribunal of the Prætor, or by enrollment on the registers of the
census, or in the presence of friends, are permitted to liberate their
entire bodies of slaves; provided however, that no other reason prevents
their receiving their freedom.

​(45) What we have stated with reference to the number of slaves which
can be manumitted by will should be understood to mean that where a man
has a right to liberate the half, the third, the fourth, or the fifth
part of his entire body of slaves, he shall in no case be restricted to
a smaller number than he would have been permitted to manumit had the
estimate been made according to the next preceding scale. This provision
is in accordance with reason, for it certainly would be absurd for any
one to be permitted to liberate five out of his ten slaves, because he
is granted authority to manumit half of that number; while another,
having twelve slaves, would not be permitted to manumit more than four;
and anyone who has more than ten and not more than thirty, under the
same rule should be permitted also to manumit five, the same number
which he who has ten is allowed to liberate.

​(46) If freedom should be granted by a testator in his will to a
greater number of slaves than is above mentioned, and the names are
written in a circle so that no order of manumission can be ascertained,
none of the said slaves shall become free; because the *Lex Fufia
Caninia*, as well as other special Decrees of the Senate, have declared
all testamentary provisions devised for the purpose 01 evading the law
to be void.

​(47) In conclusion, it should be noted that, as it is provided by the
*Lex Ælia, Sentia* that slaves who have been manumitted for the purpose
of defrauding a patron, or creditors, do not become free; for the
Senate, at the suggestion of the Divine Hadrian, decreed that this rule
should also apply to foreigners, while the other provisions of the same
law do not apply to them.

​(48) There is another division with reference to the law of persons,
for some persons are their own masters, and some are subject to the
authority of others.

​(49) Again, of those persons who are subject to the authority of
another, some are in his power, others are in his hand, and others are
considered his property.

​(50) Let us now consider those that are subject to the authority of
another, for, when we ascertain who they are, we shall then understand
what persons are their own masters.

​(51) In the first place, let us examine those who are in the power of
another.

​(52) Slaves are in the power of their masters, and this power is
acknowledged by the Law of Nations, for we know that among all nations
alike the master has the power of life and death over his slaves, and
whatever property is acquired by a slave is acquired by his master.

​(53) At the present time, however, neither Roman citizens nor any other
persons who are under the empire of the Roman people are permitted to
employ excessive or causeless severity against their slaves; for by a
constitution of the Most Holy Emperor Antoninus anyone who kills his
slave, without good reason, is not less liable than one who kills the
slave of another; and the excessive harshness of masters is restrained
by another constitution of the same Emperor; for he, having been
consulted by certain governors of provinces with reference to slaves who
flee for refuge to the temples of the Gods or the statues of the
Emperor,^[1]^ ordered that if the cruelty of masters appeared to be
intolerable, they should be compelled to sell their slaves; and in both
cases he acted justly, for we should not make a bad use of our rights,
in accordance with which principle the administration of their own
property is forbidden to spendthrifts.

​(54) But, as among Roman citizens, a double ownership may exist (for a
slave is understood to be subject to bonitarian or quiritarian right or
to belong to both these classes) so we merely say that a slave is in the
power of his owner if he forms part of his property by bonitarian right,
even if at the same time he may not belong to him by quiritarian right;
for anyone who has the bare quiritarian right in a slave is not
understood to have him in his power.

​(55) In like manner, our children whom we have begotten in lawful
marriage are under our control. This right is peculiar to Roman
citizens, for there are hardly any other men who have such authority
over their children as we have, and this the Divine Hadrian stated in
the Edict which he published with reference to persons who petitioned
for Roman citizenship for themselves and for their children, for he
said: "It does not escape my knowledge that the Galatians hold that
children are in the power of their parents."

​(56) Roman citizens are understood to have contracted marriage
according to the Civil Law and to have the children begotten by them in
their power if they marry Roman citizens, or even Latins or foreigners
whom they have the right to marry; for the result of legal marriage is
that the children follow the condition of the father and not only are
Roman citizens by birth, but also become subject to paternal authority.

​(57) Therefore, certain veterans are usually granted permission by the
Imperial Constitutions to contract civil marriage with those Latin or
foreign women whom they first marry after their discharge, and the
children born of such unions become Roman citizens by birth, and are
subject to the authority of their fathers.

(57a) Marriage, however, cannot take place with persons of servile
condition.

​(58) Nor are we permitted to marry any free woman, as we should refrain
from contracting matrimony with certain ones of this class.

^[1]^ The right of asylum, derived by Rome from Greece, did not attach
to all temples, or Imperial statues, but only to such as long continued
custom had invested with that privilege, of which debtors, slaves, and
violators of the law constantly availed themselves. The clergy, after
the introduction of Christianity, being well aware of the financial and
political advantages which would accrue to them by the perpetuation of
this practice, encouraged and confirmed it, until the abuse of the right
of sanctuary, through the immunity enjoyed by notorious criminals,
became one of the worst scandals of mediæval times. — ED.

​(59) For marriage cannot be contracted between persons who sustain to
one another the relation of ascendants and descendants, nor can legal
matrimony exist between them; for instance, between father and daughter,
mother and son, or grandfather and granddaughter; and if such persons
form unions they are said to have contracted nefarious and incestuous
marriages.

To such an extent does this rule apply that, although the relationship
of parents and children may have been established by adoption, they
cannot contract matrimony with one another, and even if the adoption has
been dissolved, the same rule of law will continue to apply; so that I
could not take as a wife a woman who sustains to me the relationship of
daughter or granddaughter by adoption, even if I have emancipated her.

​(60) This rule also applies to persons related in the collateral
degree, but not to the same extent.

​(61) Marriage is indeed prohibited between brother and sister, whether
they are born of the same father or mother or merely of one of these
parents in common; but although legal marriage cannot take place between
me and my sister by adoption as long as the adoption continues to exist,
still if the adoption is dissolved by emancipation I can marry her, and
if I should be emancipated, no impediment to the marriage will exist.

​(62) It is lawful for a man to marry the daughter of his brother, and
this first became customary when the Divine Claudius married Agrippina,
his brother's daughter, but it is not lawful for anyone to marry his
sister's daughter, and this rule is stated in the Imperial
Constitutions. It is likewise illegal for a man to take as his wife his
paternal or maternal aunt.

​(63) Moreover, I cannot marry my former mother-in-law or
daughter-in-law, or my step-daughter or step-mother. We make use of the
word "former," because if the marriage by which affinity of this kind
was established is still in existence, there is another reason why I
cannot marry her, for a woman cannot marry two men, nor can a man have
two wives.

​(64) Therefore, if anyone should contract a nefarious and incestuous
marriage he is considered to have neither a wife nor children, hence the
issue of such a union are considered to have a mother but no father, and
for this reason are not subject to paternal authority, but resemble
children whom the mother has conceived through promiscuous intercourse;
and they, in like manner, are understood to have no father, as he also
is uncertain; therefore they are ordinarily called illegitimate
children, either from the Greek word meaning conceived indiscriminately,
or because they are children without any father.

​(65) It sometimes happens that children when born are not under the
control of their fathers but are afterwards subjected to their
authority.

​(66) For instance, under the *Lex Ælia Sentia*, if a Latin, after
having married, should have a son who is a Latin by a Latin mother, or
who is a Roman citizen by a Roman mother, he will not have him under his
control; but if he should afterwards obtain the right of Roman
citizenship by the evidence required by law, his son will, at the same
time, be brought under his power.

​(67) Likewise, if a Roman citizen should marry a Latin or a foreign
woman through ignorance, believing that she was a Roman citizen, and
should have a son, the latter will not be under his control because he
will not be a Roman citizen, but either a Latin or a foreigner; that is
to say, he will belong to the same condition as his mother, as no child
follows the condition of its father unless the right to legal marriage
existed between its parents; but by a Decree of the Senate it is
permitted to prove the cause of error, and in this way the wife and the
son will both obtain Roman citizenship, and the son will, from that
time, begin to be under the control of his father. The same rule applies
where a Roman citizen marries a woman belonging to the class of the
*dediticii*, except that the wife does not become a Roman citizen.

​(68) Moreover, if a female Roman citizen should, through mistake, marry
a foreigner under the impression that he was a Roman citizen, she will
be permitted to prove the cause of error, and in this way both her son
and her husband will obtain Roman citizenship, and, at the same time,
the son will begin to be subject to the authority of the father. The
same rule also applies if the woman marries a foreigner as a Latin under
the terms of the *Lex Ælia Sentia*, as provision for a case of this kind
is specially made by the Decree of the Senate. Again, the same rule
applies to a certain extent if she should marry a man belonging to the
class of the *dediticii*, as being either a Roman citizen or a Latin
under the provisions of the *Lex Ælia Sentia*, except that her husband
belonging to the class of the *dediticii* remains in the same condition,
and therefore his son, although he becomes a Roman citizen, is not
subjected to the authority of his father.

​(69) Likewise, if a Latin woman should marry a foreigner believing him
to be a Latin in accordance with the *Lex Ælia, Sentia*, on the birth of
a son she can, under the Decree of the Senate, prove the cause of her
error, and then all the parties will become Roman citizens, and the son
will pass under the control of his father.

​(70) The same rule has been established where a Latin man marries a
woman who is a foreigner under the impression that she is either a Latin
or a Roman citizen, with a view to taking advantage of the *Lex Ælia
Sentia*.

​(71) Moreover, a Roman citizen who thinks that he is a Latin, and for
this reason marries a Latin woman, will be permitted to prove the cause
of his error in case of the birth of a son, just as if he had married
his wife under the provisions of the *Lex Ælia Sentia*. Likewise, those
who being Roman citizens think that they are foreigners and marry
foreign women, are permitted by the Decree of the Senate, on the birth
of a son, to prove the cause of their error; and this having been done,
the wife becomes a Roman citizen, and the son not only obtains to Roman
citizenship but also is brought under the authority of his father.

​(72) Whatever we have said with reference to a son is also understood
to apply to a daughter.

​(73) And, so far as proving the cause of the error is concerned, as
nothing with reference to this was provided by the Decree of the Senate,
it makes no difference how old the son or daughter may be unless he or
she should be a Latin; because it was also declared by the *Lex Ælia
Sentia*that in this case if the son or daughter is less than a year old
the cause cannot be proved. It has not escaped my observation that it
was stated in a rescript of the Divine Hadrian, with reference to the
proof of the cause of the error, that the child must be a year old, but
the right did not seem to be of general application, as the Emperor
issued the rescript under peculiar circumstances.

​(74) If a foreigner, believing himself to be a Roman citizen, married a
woman who is a Roman citizen, the question arises whether he could prove
the cause of error under the Decree of the Senate. He could not do so,
however, as this privilege is not granted by the Decree of the Senate to
a foreigner, even though he, being mistaken, should have married a Roman
citizen, unless this right was especially conferred upon him. But, when
a foreigner married a woman who is a Roman citizen, and after a son was
born, he obtained Roman citizenship in some other way, then when the
question arose whether he could prove the cause of error, the Emperor
Antoninus stated in a rescript that he could do so, just as if he had
remained a foreigner; from which we gather that even a foreigner can
prove the cause of error.

​(75) From what we have said, it is apparent that where either a Roman
citizen marries a foreign woman or a foreigner marries a woman who is a
Roman citizen, the child born of the union is a foreigner. If, however,
a marriage of this kind should have been contracted through mistake, the
defect can be remedied in the manner which we explained above. But if no
error took place, and the parties, aware of their condition, contracted
marriage, the defect of an union of this kind can, under no
circumstances, be remedied.

​(76) We, however, are speaking of persons who have not the right to
contract legal marriage; for, otherwise, if a Roman citizen should marry
a foreign woman with whom civil marriage can be contracted as is stated
above, a legal marriage takes place, and a son born to the parties is a
Roman citizen, and will become subject to the authority of his father.

​(77) Likewise, if a female Roman citizen should marry a foreigner who
is entitled to contract a legal marriage, and a son is born, he will be
an alien, and the lawful son of his father, just as if he had begotten
him with a foreign woman. At the present time, however, by a Decree of
the Senate enacted at the instance of the Divine Hadrian, even if the
right of civil marriage did not exist between a woman who is a Roman
citizen and a foreigner, the child born of the union is the lawful son
of his father.

​(78) What we have stated, however, with reference to a female Roman
citizen marrying a foreigner, and their issue being an alien, is derived
from the *Lex Minicia*, by which it is provided that where a child is
born of an unequal marriage it follows the condition of the parent of
inferior rank. On the other hand, it is provided by the same law that if
a Roman citizen should marry a foreign woman with whom the right of
legal marriage did not exist, the child born of this union will be a
foreigner. The *Lex Minicia* was not especially necessary in a case of
this kind, for, without this law, the child would have followed the
condition of its mother, as this is the rule by the Law of Nations,
among those between whom the right of civil marriage does not exist.
This provision of the law which directs that the issue of a Roman
citizen and a foreign woman shall be a foreigner seems to be
superfluous, for even without this law this would be the case under the
Law of Nations.

​(79) Moreover, to such an extent does this rule apply that the issue of
the marriage between a Roman citizen and a Latin woman follows the
condition of its mother, for in the *Lex Minicia* not only are alien
nations and peoples designated as "foreigners," but also those who are
called Latins; and it also refers to other Latins who had their own
peoples and states, and were included under the head of foreigners.

​(80) On the other hand, by the same rule, the son of a Latin father and
a mother who was a Roman citizen, whether the marriage was contracted
under the provisions of the *Lex Ælia Sentia* or not, is born a Roman
citizen. There were some authorities, however, who held that where a
marriage was contracted under the *Lex Ælia Sentia* the child was born a
Latin; for the reason that in this instance the right of legal marriage
was conferred upon the parties by the *Lex Ælia Sentia et Junia*, and
legal marriage always has the effect of giving the child the same
condition as its father; for, if the marriage were otherwise contracted,
the child, by the Law of Nations, would follow the condition of its
mother, and for this reason would be a Roman citizen. We, however, make
use of the rule established by the Decree of the Senate at the instance
of the Divine Hadrian, by which it is declared that, under all
circumstances, the child of a Latin man and a woman who is a Roman
citizen is born a Roman citizen.

​(81) In conformity with these provisions, the said Decree of the
Senate, enacted at the instance of the Divine Hadrian, also prescribes
that the issue of a Latin man and a foreign woman, as well as that of a
foreign man and a Latin woman, follows the condition of the mother.

​(82) The result of this is that the child of a female slave and a
freeman is, by the Law of Nations, born a slave; and, on the other hand,
the child of a free woman and a male slave is free by birth.

​(83) We should note, however, whether any law or enactment having the
force of law, in any case changes the rule of the Law of Nations.

​(84) For example, under the Claudian Decree of the Senate, a woman who
is a Roman citizen and has sexual intercourse with a slave belonging to
another with the consent of his master will, in accordance with the
agreement, remain free herself while she gives birth to a slave; for the
contract entered into between her and the owner of the slave is declared
to be valid by the Decree of the Senate. Afterwards, however, the Divine
Hadrian, influenced by the injustice and impropriety of the law,
restored the rule of the Law of Nations, so that as the woman herself
remains free, her child is also born free.

​(85) Likewise, by another law, children born of a female slave and a
freeman could be born free; for it is provided by the said law that if
anyone should have sexual intercourse with a female slave belonging to
another and whom he believed to be free, and any male children should be
born, they will be free; but any female children would be the property
of him to whom their mother, the female slave, belonged. In this case,
however, the Divine Vespasian, influenced by the impropriety of the law,
restored the rule of the Law of Nations, so that, in every instance,
even if female children should be born, they will become the slaves of
the person who owned their mother.

​(86) Another section of the same law remains in force, namely, that any
children born to a free woman and a slave who is the property of
another, and whom she knew to be a slave, are born slaves; hence among
those who are not subject to this law, the child follows the condition
of its mother^[1]^ by the Law of Nations, and on this account is free.

​(87) In those cases, however, where the child follows the condition of
the mother and not that of the father, it is perfectly clear that it is
not subject to the authority of his father, even though the latter may
be a Roman citizen; and therefore we stated above that in certain
instances where a marriage which was not lawful was contracted through a
mistake, the Senate could intervene and remedy the defect of the
marriage, and in this way generally bring it about that the son should
be subjected to the authority of his father.

​(88) If a female slave should conceive by a Roman citizen and
afterwards, having been manumitted, should become a Roman citizen and a
child should be born, although the latter would be a Roman citizen like
its father, it would still not be under the control of the latter, for
the reason that it was not conceived in lawful marriage, and because an
union of this kind is not declared to be legal by any decree of the
Senate.

​(89) The decision which was made that if a female slave should conceive
by a Roman citizen and then, after having been manumitted, her child
should be born free, is in accordance with natural law, for children who
are illegitimately conceived assume their status at the time when they
are born, and therefore, if they are born of a free woman, they will be
free, nor does it make any difference by whom their mother conceived
them while she was a female slave; but those who are lawfully conceived
assume their status at the time of conception.

​(90) Therefore, where a female citizen at Rome, who is pregnant at the
time, is interdicted from fire and water,^[2]^ and for this reason
having become a foreigner, gives birth to a child; many authorities make
a distinction, and are of the opinion that, as she conceived in lawful
marriage, her child is born a Roman citizen, but if she conceived as the
result of promiscuous intercourse, her child will be an alien.

^[1]^ This rule, as expressed in the maxim: "*Partus sequitur ventrem*,"
has always been recognized. It not only applied to slaves, but also to
illegitimate children, with reference to whom it is everywhere in force
to-day. — ed.

^[2]^ Prohibition of the use of water and fire was a death penalty
introduced by Sylla in the *Lex Cornelia*. The person upon whom it was
imposed being by its terms excluded from the enjoyment of the absolute
necessaries of life, was certain to perish miserably if the sentence had
been literally executed, which it never was, in reality. It operated,
however, as a forfeiture of civil rights, and was avoided by voluntary
exile. Certain limits were prescribed within which the privileges of
citizenship could not be exercised; and if the guilty party remained, he
became a social outcast with whom all ordinary intercourse was
prohibited, and whose acts were void in law. Those who were convicted of
capital crimes either took refuge in foreign countries, or changed their
residence beyond the radius prescribed by the sentence, trusting to good
fortune or the efforts of their friends to have it annulled, and their
disabilities removed by legislation, which was usually effected in the
*Comitia Centuriata* where the trial had taken place. Many distinguished
Romans were subjected to the interdiction from fire and water, among
them Cicero, who was, in this way, banished four hundred miles from
Rome. — ED.

​(91) Likewise, where a woman who is a Roman citizen while pregnant,
becomes a slave under the Claudian Decree of the Senate, for the reason
that she had intercourse with a slave belonging to another, against the
consent and protest of his master, many authorities make a distinction
and hold that as the child was conceived in lawful marriage, it will be
born a Roman citizen, but if it was conceived as the result of
promiscuous intercourse, it will be born the slave of the person to whom
his mother belongs.

​(92) Again, if an alien woman should conceive as the result of
promiscuous intercourse, and afterwards become a Roman citizen and bring
forth a child, the latter will be a Roman citizen. If, however, she
should conceive by an alien whom she married in accordance with foreign
laws and customs, she will, under the terms of the Decree of the Senate
enacted at the instance of the Divine Hadrian, be held to give birth to
a Roman citizen, provided Roman citizenship has also been conferred upon
the father.

​(93) Where an alien has acquired Roman citizenship for himself and his
children, the latter do not pass under the control of their father
unless the Emperor should expressly cause them to do so; and this he
only does when, after the case has been examined, he thinks that this
would be advantageous to the children. He, moreover, makes a more
diligent and minute investigation with reference to children who are
under the age of puberty and absent; and this rule is set forth in an
Edict of the Divine Hadrian.

​(94) Likewise, where anyone with his wife, during her pregnancy, is
presented with Roman citizenship, although the child, as we have
mentioned above, is born a Roman citizen, he still does not pass under
the control of his father; and this is stated in a rescript of the
Divine Hadrian. For this reason if he knows that his wife is pregnant,
and he petitions the Emperor for citizenship for himself and his wife,
he should, at the same time, ask that his child shall be subjected to
his authority.

​(95) The rule is otherwise in the case of those who, together with
their children, attain to Roman citizenship by the right of being
Latins, for their children pass under their control.

​(96) This right has been granted to certain foreign States, either by
the Roman people, or by the Senate, or by the Emperor.

The right of Latinity is either greater or less. Greater Latinity is
that of those who are elected decurions or administer any honorable
office or magistracy, and by this means obtain Roman citizenship. The
lesser right of Latinity is where only those who administer the office
of magistrate or any other honorable employment attain to Roman
citizenship; and this difference is referred to in many Imperial
rescripts.

​(97) Not only as we have stated are natural children in our power, but
also those whom we adopt.

​(98) Adoption takes place in two ways; either by the authority of the
people, or by the command of the magistrate, as for instance, of the
Prætor.

​(99) We adopt, by the authority of the people, those who are their own
masters, which kind of adoption is called arrogation, for the reason
that he who adopts is asked, that is to say, interrogated, whether he
desires to have the person whom he intends to adopt as his lawful son;
and he who is adopted is asked whether he is willing to have this done;
and the assembled people are asked whether they direct this to take
place. By the command of the magistrate we adopt those who are under the
control of their parents, whether they are in the first degree of
descendants, as a son or a daughter, or whether they belong to an
inferior degree, as a grandson or a granddaughter, a great-grandson or a
great-granddaughter.

​(100) Adoption by the people can only take place at Rome; and the other
usually takes place in the provinces before the governors of the same.

​(101) The better opinion is that women cannot be adopted by the voice
of the people; but women may be adopted in the tribunal of the Prætor at
Rome, or in the provinces in the tribunal of the proconsul or the
lieutenant.

​(102) The adoption of a child under the age of puberty by the vote of
the people was at one time forbidden, and at another permitted; but at
present, by the Epistle of the Emperor Antoninus addressed to the
pontiffs, it is allowed under certain conditions, if there seems to be
good cause for the adoption. We can, however, adopt persons of any age
in the tribunal of the Prætor at Rome, or in the provinces in that of
the proconsul, or the lieutenant.

​(103) It is a rule common to both kinds of adoption that persons who
are incapable of begetting children, such as eunuchs, can adopt.

​(104) Women, however, cannot in any way adopt other persons, for the
reason that they cannot exercise authority even over their natural
children.

​(105) Likewise, if anyone adopts another, either by the vote of the
people, or by the consent of the Prætor or the governor of a province,
he can give the son whom he has adopted in adoption to another.

​(106) It is a question, however, with reference to both forms of
adoption, whether a person can adopt another who is older than himself.

​(107) It is peculiar to that kind of adoption which takes place by the
vote of the people, that if he who gives himself to be arrogated has
children under his control, he will not only himself be subject to the
authority of the arrogator, but his children will also be under the
control of the latter, as grandchildren.

​(108) Now let us consider those persons who are in our hand, which
right is also peculiar to Roman citizens.

​(109) Both males and females are under the authority of another, but
females alone are placed in the hands.

​(110) Formerly this ceremony was performed in three different ways,
namely, by use, by confarreation, and by coemption.

​(111) A woman came into the hand of her husband by use when she had
lived with him continuously for a year after marriage; for the reason
that she was obtained by usucaption, as it were, through possession for
the term of a year, and passed into the family of her husband where she
occupied the position of a daughter. Hence it is provided by the Law of
the Twelve Tables that if a woman was unwilling to be placed in the hand
of her husband in this way, she should every year absent herself for
three nights, and in this manner interrupt the use during the said year;
but all of this law has been partly repealed by legal enactments, and
partly abolished by disuse.

​(112) Women are placed in the hand of their husbands by confarreation,
through a kind of sacrifice made to Jupiter Farreus, in which a cake is
employed, from whence the ceremony obtains its name; and in addition to
this, for the purpose of performing the ceremony, many other things are
done and take place, accompanied with certain solemn words, in the
presence of ten witnesses. This law is still in force in our time, for
the principal flamens, that is to say, those of Jupiter, Mars, and
Quirinus, as well as the chief of the sacred rites, are exclusively
selected from persons born of marriages celebrated by confarreation. Nor
can these persons themselves serve as priests without marriage by
confarreation.

​(113) In marriage by coemption, women become subject to their husbands
by mancipation, that is to say by a kind of fictitious sale; for the man
purchases the woman who comes into his hand in the presence of not less
than five witnesses, who must be Roman citizens over the age of puberty,
and also of a balance-holder.

​(114) By this act of sale a woman can not only make a coemption to her
husband but also to a stranger, that is to say, the sale takes place
either on account of marriage or by way of trust; for a woman who
disposes of herself in this way to her husband for the purpose of
occupying the place of his daughter is said to have done so on account
of matrimony; but where she does this for some other purpose, either to
a husband or to a stranger, as for instance in order to avoid a
guardianship, she is said to have made a coemption by way of trust.

​(115) The method by which this is done is as follows: If a woman wishes
to get rid of her present guardians and obtain another in their stead,
she makes this disposal of herself with their consent; and then the
other party to the sale sells her again to him to whom she wishes to be
her guardian, and he manumits her by the ceremony of the wand of the
Prætor, and by this means becomes her guardian, and is designated a
fiduciary guardian, as will hereafter appear.

(115a) Formerly a fiduciary coemption took place for the purpose of
acquiring power to make a will, for women, with some exceptions, did not
then have testamentary capacity unless they had made fictitious sales of
this kind, and after having been resold, were manumitted; but the
Senate, at the suggestion of the Divine Hadrian, abolished this
necessity of making a fictitious sale.

(115b) Even if the woman makes a fiduciary sale of herself to her
husband, she nevertheless occupies the place of his daughter; for if a
wife comes into the hand of her husband for any reason whatsoever, it
has been decided that she enjoys the rights of a daughter.

​(116) It remains for us to explain what persons are subject to
mancipation.

​(117) All children of either the male or female sex who are under the
control of their father can be mancipated by him in the same way as that
in which slaves can be mancipated.

​(118) The same rule of law applies to those persons who are in the hand
of others, and they can be mancipated in the same way by those to whom
they have been sold, just as children may be mancipated by their father;
and while she who is married to the purchaser may only occupy the place
of his daughter; still, though she may not be married to him, nor occupy
the place of his daughter, she can still be mancipated by him.

(118a) Generally speaking, mancipation takes place either by parents or
by those who obtain possession by coemption, when the parents and the
so-called purchasers desire to release the persons from their authority,
as will appear more clearly hereafter.

​(119) Mancipation, as we have mentioned above, is a kind of fictitious
sale, and the law governing it is peculiar to Roman citizens. The
ceremony is as follows: After not less than five witnesses (who must be
Roman citizens above the age of puberty) have been called together, as
well as another person of the same condition who holds a brazen balance
in his hand and is styled the "balance holder," the so-called purchaser,
holding a piece of bronze in his hands, says: "I declare that this man
belongs to me by my right as a Roman citizen, and let him be purchased
by me with this piece of bronze, and bronze balance." Then he strikes
the scales with the piece of bronze, and gives it to the so-called
vendor as purchase money.

​(120) In this manner both slaves and free persons are mancipated, as
well as such animals as are subject to sale, among which are included
oxen, horses, mules, and asses, as well as urban and rustic estates; for
instance, Italian lands are usually disposed of in the same manner.

​(121) The sale of land differs from the mancipation of other things, in
that both slaves and free persons, as well as animals subject to
mancipation cannot be disposed of in this way unless they are present;
as it is necessary for him who acquires the object by mancipation to be
able to grasp it with his hands, and the ceremony is designated
mancipation because the property is seized with the hands. Lands,
however, are usually mancipated at a distance.

​(122) A piece of brass and a balance are employed for the reason that
in former times only brazen money was in circulation, and this consisted
of asses, double asses, half asses, and quarter asses; nor was any gold
or silver coin in circulation, as we learn by the Law of the Twelve
Tables. The value of the purchasing power of these coins was not
estimated by their number, but by their weight; hence an as consisted of
a pound of bronze, a double as of two pounds (whence it derived its
name, which is still retained), while the half-asses and quarter-asses
were estimated by their respective parts of a pound. Therefore, in
former times, those who paid out money to anyone did not count it but
weighed it, and the slaves who were permitted to disburse money were
called "weighers."

​(123) If anyone should ask what is the difference between coemption and
mancipation, the reply is that the first ceremony does not reduce the
party to a servile condition; but persons of either sex mancipated by
parents or others are reduced to the condition of slaves, to such an
extent that they cannot take either an estate or a legacy under the will
of the party by whom they have been mancipated, unless they have been
ordered to be free by the terms of the same will; just as the law is
with reference to the persons of slaves. The reason for this distinction
is clear, as the words used by parents and so-called purchasers are the
same as those employed in the mancipation of slaves, but in the
coemption of women this is not the case.

​(124) Let us now consider in what ways those who are subject to the
authority of another are released from it.

​(125) And, in the first place, let us examine those who are under the
power of others.

​(126) We can understand from what has been stated above with reference
to the manumission of slaves, how they are freed from the power of their
masters.

​(127) Children who are under the authority of their father become their
own masters at his death. The following distinction, however, must be
made, namely: When a father dies, his sons and his daughters always
become independent; but when a grandfather dies, his grandsons and
granddaughters do not, under all circumstances, become independent, but
only where, after the death of their grandfather, they do not again pass
under the control of their father. Therefore, if at the time of the
death of their grandfather their father was living and was under the
control of his father, they pass under the control of their father after
the death of their grandfather; but if, at the time of the death of
their grandfather, their father was either dead or had been released
from the control of his father, then the grandchildren, for the reason
that they cannot pass under his control, will become their own masters.

​(128) As a person who, on account of the commission of some crime, has
been interdicted from water and fire under the *Lex Cornelia*, loses his
Roman citizenship, and for this reason is excluded from the number of
Roman citizens, his children cease to be under his control, just as if
he were dead; for reason does not permit that a person of the condition
of an alien should have a Roman citizen subject to this authority. In
like manner, if anyone who is in the power of his father is interdicted
from water and fire, he ceases to be under his control, as it is not
reasonable that a man of the condition of an alien should be under the
parental authority of a Roman citizen.

​(129) Even if the father should be taken captive by the enemy and
thereby become the enemy's slave, nevertheless, his authority over his
children remains in abeyance under the law of *postliminium*, by which
those who were captured by the enemy and return, recover all their
former rights; and, therefore, if he should return, he will have his
children in his power. If, however, he should die while in captivity,
his children will become their own masters; but it may be doubted
whether this took place at the time when the father died in the hands of
the enemy, or at the time when he was captured. Likewise, if the son
himself, or a grandson, should be taken captive by the enemy, we say
that the authority of the father remains in abeyance on account of the
law of *postliminium*.

​(130) Moreover, male children are released from paternal authority if
they are installed priests of Jupiter; and females, if they are chosen
Vestal Virgins.

​(131) In former times also, when the Roman people were accustomed to
establish colonies in Latin territory, sons, who, by the order of their
father, placed their names upon the roll of the Latin colony, ceased to
be under the control of their father, because they became citizens of
another State.

​(132) Again, children cease to be under parental authority by means of
mancipation. A son, however, by three mancipations, and other children
either of the male or female sex by a single mancipation, are released
from parental authority; for the Law of the Twelve Tables only mentions
three mancipations with reference to a son, as follows: "If a father
sells his son three times, let him be free from the control of his
father." This ceremony takes place in the following manner. The father
sells his son to a third party, and the latter manumits him by the wand
of the prætor, and by doing so, he is restored to the control of his
father; and the latter then sells him a second time, either to the same
person or to another (but it is customary to sell him to the same
person); and he again manumits him in the same way, and by this act the
son is again placed in the power of his father; and the father then
sells him a third time, either to the same person or to another (it is
customary, however, for him to be sold to the same person), and by
virtue of this sale he ceases to be under the control of his father,
even though he has not yet been manumitted, but still remains in the
condition of one who has been sold.

​(133) It should, however, be noted that one who has a son, and by him a
grandson under his control, has full power to release his son from his
control, and still to retain authority over his grandson; or, on the
other hand, he has the right to manumit his grandson, or to render both
parties their own masters. We understand that this rule also applies to
great-grandsons.

​(134) Again, parents also lose their authority over their children by
giving them in adoption. Where a son is given in adoption, three sales
are required, and two intervening manumissions must take place, as is
customary when the father releases a son from his authority, in order
that he may become his own master. Then, the son is either resold to the
father and he who adopts him claims him as his son before the prætor;
and, if his natural father does not claim him, he is given by the prætor
to the party who claims him by adoption; or, if he is not sold again to
his father, he who adopts him claims him from him to whom he was sold
for the third time. It is, however, more convenient for him to be resold
to his natural father. In the case of other offspring of either sex, one
sale is sufficient, whether a resale is made to the natural father or
not. The same ceremony ordinarily takes place in the provinces, in the
presence of the governor.

​(135) When a grandson is conceived after the first or second sale of a
son, although he may not be born until after the third sale of his
father, he, nevertheless, remains under the control of his grandfather,
and may be emancipated, or given in adoption by him. A grandson,
however, who is begotten after the third sale of a son, is not born
under the control of his grandfather; but Labeo holds that he is born
under the control of him to whom his father was sold. We, however, make
use of the following rule, that as long as its father is in mancipation
the right of the child remains in suspense; and if the father should be
manumitted, the child will pass under his authority; but if he should
die before the ceremony of mancipation has been completed, the child
will become its own master.

(135a) We understand that the same rule applies to the case of a
grandson who has been mancipated once, as it does to that of a son who
has been mancipated three times, for, as we stated above, what three
sales accomplished with reference to a son, one accomplishes in the case
of a grandson.

​(136) A woman placed in the hand of her husband by confarreation is
not, for this reason, at present, released from paternal authority
unless the ceremony of coemption has been performed; for it is provided
by the *Lex Asinia Antistia* enacted during the Consulate of Cornelius
Maximus and Tubero, with reference to priestesses of Jupiter being in
the hand of their husbands as far as relates to the sacred rites; but in
all other respects they are considered as not being under such
restraint. Where, however, women are placed in the hand of their
husbands by coemption, they are released from parental control; and it
makes no difference whether they are placed in the hand of their
husbands, or in that of strangers; although those alone are considered
to occupy the place of daughters who are placed in the hand of their
husbands.

​(137) Women placed in the hand of their husbands by coemption cease to
be subject to this authority in the same way as daughters under the
control of their father; that is to say, either by the death of him in
whose power they are, or because he has been interdicted from water and
fire.

(137a) They also cease to be in the hand of their husbands by
remancipation; and if emancipated after a single sale they become their
own mistresses. A woman who has concluded a coemption with a stranger by
way of trust, can compel him to sell her again to anyone whom she may
select; but one who has been sold to her husband, in whose hand she is,
cannot compel him to do so, any more than a daughter can compel her
father, even though she may be an adopted daughter. A woman, however,
can, by serving notice of repudiation, force her husband to release her,
just as if she had never been married.

​(138) As persons who have been sold in this way are considered to
occupy the position of slaves, if they should be manumitted either by
the prætor, or by enrollment in the census, or by will, they become
their own masters.

​(139) In this instance, however, the *Lex Ælia Sentia* does not apply.
Therefore, we do not require the party who manumits, or the one who is
manumitted, to be of any particular age; and no attention is paid to
whether the party granting the manumission has either a patron or a
creditor; and not even the number prescribed by the *Lex Fufia Caninia*
is considered with reference to persons of this description.

​(140) But even if the party having possession of the one who is sold
should be unwilling, the latter can obtain his freedom by being enrolled
on the register of the census; except in the case of one whom his father
has mancipated under the condition that he should be again sold to him;
for, in this instance, the father is considered to have reserved, to a
certain extent, his own power for himself which he received by
mancipation. And, indeed, he is not said to have received his freedom by
enrollment on the register of the census, against the consent of the
party who holds him in mancipation, if his father gave him up as the
result of a noxal action; for instance, where his father has been
condemned on account of a theft committed by his son and has surrendered
him by mancipation to the plaintiff, for then the plaintiff holds him
instead of the payment of a sum of money.

​(141) In conclusion, we observe that no insulting act should be
committed by us against persons whom we hold in mancipation; otherwise,
we shall be liable to a suit for injury committed. And, indeed, men
should not be retained for any length of time in this condition, but,
for the most part, as a matter of form, and only for an instant, unless
the parties are mancipated on account of a noxal action.

​(142) Let us now pass to another division. For persons who are neither
subject to paternal authority, nor are in the hand, nor are held in
mancipation by another, may still be under guardianship or curatorship,
or may be free from either of these restrictions. Let us first consider
those who may be under guardianship and curatorship; for then we shall
understand who the other persons are who are subject to neither of these
restraints.

​(143) And, first, let us examine those who are under guardianship.

​(144) Parents are permitted to appoint testamentary guardians for their
children who are subject to their authority, who are under the age of
puberty, and of the male sex; and for those of the female sex, no matter
what their age may be, and even if they are married; for the ancients
required women, even if they were of full age, to remain under
guardianship on account of the levity of their disposition.

​(145) Therefore, if anyone appoints a guardian for his son and daughter
by will, and both should arrive at the age of puberty, the son will
cease to have a guardian, but the daughter will nevertheless remain
subject to guardianship; for it is only under the *Lex Julia et Papia*
that women are released from guardianship by the birth of children.
Those whom we speak of do not include Vestal Virgins, whom the ancients
desired to be free on account of the honor of the priesthood; hence this
was provided by the Law of the Twelve Tables.

​(146) We can, however, only appoint testamentary guardians for
grandsons and granddaughters, if after our death they do not again pass
under the control of their father. Therefore, if my son was under my
control at the time of my death, my grandsons by him cannot have a
guardian appointed by my will, although they were under my control at
the time; for the reason that by my death they were placed under the
control of their father.

​(147) As in many other instances posthumous children are considered as
already born, in this case also it has been decided that testamentary
guardians can be appointed for posthumous children, as well as for those
previously born; provided, however, that if born during our lifetime,
they would have been subject to our authority. We can also appoint them
our heirs, but it is not permitted to appoint posthumous strangers
heirs.

​(148) A testamentary guardian can be appointed for a wife who is in the
hand of the testator; just as if she were a daughter; and, likewise, one
may be appointed for a daughter-in-law who is in the hand of a son, just
as if she were a granddaughter.

​(149) A guardian can most properly be appointed in the following
manner, namely: "I appoint Lucius Titius guardian of my children." If,
however, the appointment was made as follows: "Let Lucius Titius be the
guardian of my children and my wife," it is understood to be legally
made.

​(150) The choice of a guardian may be left to a wife who is in the hand
of the testator, that is to say, he can permit her to select any
guardian whom she may choose, as follows: "I give to Titia, my wife, the
selection of her guardian." In this instance, the wife is permitted to
appoint a guardian either for the administration of all the property, or
only of one or two things.

​(151) Moreover, the choice may be granted either absolutely or with
restrictions.

​(152) It is ordinarily granted absolutely in the way that we have
mentioned above. Where it is granted with restrictions, the following
form is usually employed: "I grant to Titia, my wife, only one choice of
a guardian"; or: "I only grant her the right to make two selections."

​(153) These privileges of selection are very different, for she who has
an unlimited right of choice, can choose a guardian twice or three
times, or oftener; but she who has a limited right of choice cannot make
more than one if only one is granted; and if only two are granted she
has no right to make more than two selections.

​(154) Guardians who are especially appointed by will are called
"dative"; and those ta whom the selection of a guardian is left are
called "optative."

​(155) By the Law of the Twelve Tables the nearest agnates become the
guardians of children for whom no guardian was appointed by will, and
they are styled legal guardians.

​(156) Agnates are blood relatives through the male sex, for instance,
through the father; as a brother having the same father, the son of a
brother, or a grandson by him, and also a paternal uncle and his son and
grandson. Those who are related through the female sex are not agnates,
but cognates, according to natural law. Therefore, agnation does not
exist between a maternal uncle and a son or a sister, but cognation
does. In like manner, the son of my maternal aunt, or the sister of my
mother, is not my agnate, but my cognate; and, on the other hand, I am
related to him by the same rule, because children follow the family of
their father, and not that of their mother.

​(157) Formerly, however, according to the Law of the Twelve Tables,
females had agnates as legal guardians, but afterwards the *Lex
Claudia*, which abolished the guardianship of agnates, so far as females
were concerned, was enacted, and therefore a male child under the age of
puberty has his brother, who is above the age of puberty, or his
paternal uncle, as his guardian; but a female child cannot have a
guardian of this kind.

​(158) The right of agnation is extinguished by the loss of civil
rights, but the right of cognation is not affected by it, for the reason
that a civil law can abrogate civil rights, but cannot extinguish
natural rights.

​(159) The loss of civil rights is a change of former condition, and
this takes place in three ways; it is either greatest, or less, which
some call intermediate, or least.

​(160) The greatest loss of civil rights occurs when anyone forfeits at
the same time both his citizenship and his freedom, which happens to
those who are not inscribed on the register of the census, and are in
consequence ordered to be sold; which rule has for some time been
abolished by disuse. Under the terms of the *Lex Ælia Sentia, dediticii*
are liable to the same penalty for violation of its provisions

if they have established their domicile in the City of Rome. It also
takes place where, under the Claudian Decree of the Senate, free women
become the slaves of the owners of other slaves with whom they have
cohabited against the consent and protest of their masters.

​(161) Less, or intermediate, loss of civil rights occurs when
citizenship is forfeited but freedom is retained, which happens when
anyone is interdicted from fire and water.

​(162) The least loss of civil rights results when both citizenship and
freedom are retained, but a man's domestic condition is altered; which
happens to those who are adopted, as well as to women subject to
coemption, and also in the case of those who are given in mancipation
and are afterwards manumitted; so that as often as anyone is mancipated,
or remancipated, or manumitted, he suffers a loss of civil rights.

​(163) The right of agnation is extinguished not only by the two greater
losses of civil rights but also by the least; and therefore if a father
should emancipate one of two children, neither can be the guardian of
the other by the right of agnation after his death.

​(164) When agnates have a right to guardianship, all of them are not
entitled to that right at once, but only those in the nearest degree.

​(165) By the same law of the Twelve Tables, the guardianship of
freedwomen and freedmen under the age of puberty belongs to their
patrons and the children of the latter. This kind of guardianship is
also styled legal, not because special provision is made for it by this
law, but for the reason that this has been accepted by interpretation
just as if it had been expressly stated in the words of the statute; for
as the law directed that the estates of freedmen and freedwomen who died
intestate should belong to their patrons and the children of the latter,
the ancient authorities held that the law intended that they should be
entitled to their guardianship because it ordered that agnates whom it
called to the succession should also be guardians.

CONCERNING FIDUCIARY GUARDIANSHIP.

​(166) As in the case of patrons, another kind of guardianship which is
also designated legal, has been established. For, if anyone should give
in mancipation to another, under the condition that he would remancipate
him to himself, either a son or a grandson by that son, who is under the
age of puberty, or a daughter or a granddaughter by a son, and their
descendants, whether they have arrived at the age of puberty or not; and
he should manumit them after they have been remancipated, he will become
their legal guardian.

(166a) There are other kinds of guardianship which are styled fiduciary,
that is to say, such as we are entitled to for the reason that a free
person has been mancipated by us, or by a relative, or by a party to
coemption and afterwards has been manumitted.

​(167) The guardianship of Latins of both sexes who are under the age of
puberty does not invariably belong to those who manumit them, but to
those to whom they belonged by quiritarian right before their
manumission. Therefore, if a female slave who belonged to you by
quiritarian right, but who was mine by bonitarian right, should be
manumitted by me alone without your taking part in the ceremony, she
would become a Latin, and her property will belong to me; but you will
have the right to her guardianship, as provision for this is made by the
*Lex Junia*. Hence, if the said slave should be made a Latin by one who
had both the bonitarian and quiritarian rights, her property as well as
her guardianship will belong to him.

​(168) Agnates, patrons, and those who manumit free persons are
permitted to transfer the guardianship of a female ward to another in
court; it is not, however, permitted to transfer the guardianship of
male wards, for the reason that this is not considered onerous, as it
terminates at the age of puberty.

​(169) He to whom a guardian is thus transferred is designated a
cessionary guardian.

​(170) If he dies, or loses his civil rights, the guardianship reverts
to the party who transferred it;, and if the latter should be either
dead or have forfeited his civil rights, the guardianship will leave the
cessionary guardian and pass to the one next in degree to the party who
transferred it.

​(171) So far as agnates are concerned, however, cessionary guardianship
does not at present exist, as guardianship of female wards by agnates
was abolished by the *Lex Claudia*.^[1]^

​(172) Certain authorities hold that fiduciary guardians also have no
right to transfer their guardianship, as they themselves have
voluntarily assumed the burdens of the same; but, although this has been
decided, still in the case of a parent who have given either a daughter,
granddaughter, or a great-granddaughter in mancipation to another under
the condition that she shall be again mancipated to him, and, this
having been done, he manumits her, the same rule should not apply; as he
is considered a legal guardian, and the same privilege should be granted
to him as to a patron.

​(173) Moreover, by a Decree of the Senate, women are permitted to
demand another guardian to take the place of one who is absent; and this
having been granted, the first guardian ceases to hold his office, nor
does it make any difference how far he may be from home.

​(174) An exception, however, is made in the case of an absent patron,
as a freedwoman is not permitted in this instance to demand another
guardian.

​(175) Again, in the same class with the patron we have a parent who has
obtained legal guardianship from the fact that he has manumitted his
daughter, granddaughter, or great-granddaughter, who has previously been
remancipated by himself. His sons, however, are only considered to
occupy the places of fiduciary guardians, but those of a patron obtain
the same guardianship which their father possessed.

^[1]^ Prior to the enactment of the *Lex Claudia*, the *res mancipi* of
a woman under the tutelary control of agnates, were not subject to
usucaption, unless the transfer had previously been sanctioned by her
guardian. — ed.

​(176) Sometimes, however, it is permitted to demand a guardian to take
the place of an absent patron; as for instance, where an estate is to be
entered upon.

​(177) The Senate decreed that the same rule should apply to the son of
a patron who was himself a ward.

​(178) For by the *Lex Julia*, enacted for the purpose of regulating
marriages, a female who is under the legal guardianship of a ward is
permitted to demand a guardian from the Prætor of the City for the
purpose of constituting her dowry.

​(179) For the son of a patron, even if he is under the age of puberty,
becomes the guardian of a freedwoman, although he cannot perform any
legal act, as he is not permitted to do anything without the authority
of his guardian.

​(180) Likewise, if any female is subject to the legal guardianship of a
person who is insane, or dumb, she is permitted by the Decree of the
Senate to demand a guardian for the purpose of constituting her dowry.

​(181) In these instances, it is clear that the patron or the patron's
son is unquestionably entitled to the guardianship.

​(182) Moreover, the Senate decreed that, if the guardian of a male or
female ward was suspected of maladministration, and was removed from the
guardianship; or if he should be excused for some good reason, and
another guardian be appointed in his stead; after this has been done,
the former guardian shall lose the guardianship.

​(183) All of these provisions are observed both at Rome and in the
provinces, but at Rome application for the appointment of a guardian
should be made to the Prætor, and in the provinces to the governor.

​(184) Formerly, when the ancient mode of procedure was in use, a
guardian was appointed for another reason, namely, where a suit was
about to be brought between the guardian and the woman, or the ward;
since because the guardian could not grant authority in his own case,
another guardian was appointed by whom the legal proceedings were
instituted; and he was called a prætorian guardian, because he was
appointed by the Urban Prætor. Some authorities, however, think that,
after the ancient mode of procedure was abolished, this method of
appointing a guardian became obsolete, but it is held by others that it
is still the practice where an action is to be brought.

​(185) If there should be no lawful guardian for a person, one is
appointed for him under the *Lex Atilia*, in the City of Rome by the
Urban Prætor and a majority of the tribunes of the people, who is styled
an "Atilian guardian"; and in the provinces he is appointed by the
governor under the *Lex Julia et Titia*.

​(186) Hence if a guardian is appointed of anyone by will under a
condition, or from a certain day, a guardian can be appointed while the
condition is pending, or before the time arrives. Likewise, if a
guardian should be appointed absolutely, a guardian can be demanded
under these laws, so long as no heir appears, and he will cease to hold
his office as guardian when the one appointed by will acquires the right
to act.

​(187) When a guardian is captured by the enemy, a substitute should be
demanded under these laws, and he will cease to be guardian if the one
who was taken captive should return, for, on his return, he will recover
the guardianship by the law of *postliminium*.^[1]^

​(188) From this it is apparent how many different kinds of
guardianships there are, and if we consider into how many classes they
may be divided a long discussion will be required, for the ancient
authorities entertained many doubts on this subject, and as we have
examined it very carefully, both in the interpretation of the Edict and
in the books which we have written on Quintus Mucius, it will be
sufficient to state that certain jurists, for instance, Quintus Mucius,
say that there are five classes, and others, like Servius Sulpicius, say
that there are three; and still others, as Labeo, say that there are
two; and

^[1]^ The *jus postliminii* of the Civil Law, was the privilege enjoyed
by prisoners of war of being, upon their return, restored to all the
rights which they possessed previous to their captivity. By the effect
of this legal fiction they were considered never to have been absent at
all. "*Postliminium fingit eum qui captus est, in civitate semper
fuisse*." The rule was also applicable to real, but not to personal
property, unless the latter was speedily retaken, and hence became
readily susceptible of identification.

Under the Law of *Postliminium*, freemen were said to "return"; slaves
to be "received"; and property to be "recovered". The *animus
revertendi* was absolutely essential for the enjoyment of the rights
which it conferred; if a prisoner of war was surrendered against his
will, he was not entitled to them. Deserters were also excluded from
participation in these advantages.

As long as a father was in captivity, the exercise of paternal control
remained in abeyance, dating from the moment of capture, but the right
again vested at the time of release. Marriage was voidable at the option
of the parties interested; hence its suspension might be indefinitely
prolonged. As a captive was temporarily *civiliter mortuus*, he could
perform no legal act; but if he died while in the hands of the enemy his
decease was presumed to have occurred in his own country, at the instant
when he lost his liberty.

The general principles of the *jus postliminii* as laid down by the
Romans, are recognized by all writers on international law. "*Per bellum
capti, ubi manus hostium quocunqua modo evaserint, neque illis fide data
sint obstricti, atque ad suos redierint, non modo pristinum statum, sed
& omnia sua bona ac jura recuperent. Quod autem res attinet, quamdiu
bellum durât, si hostibus iterum sint ereptæ sive per nos ipsos, sive
per nostros cives aut milites, eas ad antiquos dominos redire par est,
non immobiles tantum, sed & mobiles, modo liquido a nobis possint
dignosci*." (Pufendorf, *De Jure Naturæ et Gentium*, VIII, VI, 25.)

"It is therefore with reason that movables or booty are excepted from
the right of *postliminium*, unless retaken from the enemy immediately
after his capture of them; in which case, the proprietor neither finds a
difficulty in recognising his effects, nor is presumed to have
relinquished them." (Vattel, *The Law of Nations*, III, XIV, Page 393.)

"The right of postliminy is founded upon the duty of every State to
protect the persons and property of its citizens against the operations
of the enemy. When, therefore, a subject who has fallen into the hands
of the enemy is rescued by his State, he is restored to his former
rights and condition under his State. So, of the property of a subject
recaptured from the enemy by his State; it is no more the property of
the State than it was before it fell into the hands of the enemy; it
must, therefore, be restored to its former owner. But if, by the
well-established rules of public law, the title to the captured property
has become vested in the enemy captor, the former owner cannot claim its
restoration from the recaptor, because his original title has been
extinguished." (Baker, First Steps in International Law, XXXV, Pages
364, 365.) — ed.

others again, hold that there are as many kinds of guardianship as there
are forms of the same.

​(189) The law of all states declares that persons who have not reached
puberty shall be under guardianship, because it is consonant with
natural reason that one who is not of full age should be controlled by
the guardianship of another. Indeed, there is scarcely any state in
which parents are not permitted to appoint testamentary guardians for
their children; although, as we have stated above, only Roman citizens
are considered to have their children subject to paternal authority.

​(190) There does not seem to be any good reason, however, why women of
full age should be under guardianship, for the common opinion that
because of their levity of disposition they are easily deceived, and it
is only just that they should be subject to the authority of guardians,
seems to be rather apparent than real; for women of full age transact
their own affairs, but in certain cases, as a mere form, the guardian
interposes his authority, and he is often compelled to give it by the
Prætor, though he may be unwilling to do so.

​(191) Therefore, a woman has no right of action under the guardianship
against her guardian, but where guardians transact the business of their
male and female wards, they must render an account of their guardianship
in court, after their wards arrive at the age of puberty.

​(192) The legal guardianship of patrons and parents are indeed
understood to have a certain effect, for the reason that they cannot be
forced to give their consent to the making of a will, to the alienation
of property subject to mancipation, or to the assumption of obligations;
unless there should be some urgent reason for the alienation of such
property, or for undertaking the obligations aforesaid. These provisions
have been made for their own benefit, in order that where the estates of
persons who have died intestate belong to them, they can neither be
excluded from them by will, nor have the estate come into their hands
diminished in value on account of debts which have been incurred, or
through the alienation of the most valuable part of the property.

​(193) Women are not held in guardianship among foreigners as they are
with us; still, they are generally, as it were, in a state of tutelage;
as, for example, the law of the Bythinians directs that if a woman
enters into a contract it must be authorized either by her husband or by
a son who has reached the age of puberty.

​(194) Moreover, a freeborn woman is released from guardianship if she
is the mother of three children, and a freedwoman if she is the mother
of four, and is under the legal guardianship of her patron. Those who
have other kinds of guardians, as, for instance, Atilian^[1]^ or
Fiduciary, are released from guardianship by having three children.

^[1]^ The *tutor Atilianus* was appointed by the Prætor and the
tribunes, under the *Lex Atilia*, when no guardian existed. This became
necessary when there was a will, and the heir had not accepted the
estate; or the designated guardian was incapacitated; or the testament
from which he derived his authority was defective. — ed.

​(195) A freedwoman may, however, have a guardian appointed in several
other ways; for example, where she has been manumitted by a woman, for
then she must demand a guardian under the *Lex Atilia*, or in the
provinces under the *Lex Julia et Titia*, for she cannot be under the
guardianship of a patroness.

(195a) Again, if she has been manumitted by a male and should enter into
coemption with his consent, and then should be remancipated and
manumitted, she ceases to have her patron as her guardian, and begins to
have as a guardian the party by whom she was manumitted, who is
designated a fiduciary guardian.

(195b) Likewise, if her patron, or his son, gives himself in adoption, a
freedwoman should demand a guardian for herself either under the *Lex
Atilia,*or the *Lex Julia et Titia*.

(195c) Likewise, under the same laws, a freedwoman should demand a
guardian, where her patron dies and leaves no child of the male sex in
the family.

​(196) Again, when males reach the age of puberty they are released from
guardianship. Sabinus and Cassius and our other preceptors hold that a
person has arrived at the age of puberty who manifests this by the
condition of his body, that is to say, if he is capable of procreation;
but in the case of those who cannot show this condition, as for
instance, eunuchs, their age should be considered to be that at which
persons ordinarily reach puberty. Authorities belonging to another
school, however, think that the age of puberty should be estimated by
years; that is to say, they hold that a person has arrived at the age of
puberty who has completed his thirteenth year. . . .^[1]^

​(197) After having been released from guardianship, the affairs of a
minor are administered by a curator until he reaches the age when he is
qualified to transact his own business; and this rule is observed among
foreign nations, as we have stated above.

​(198) In cases of this kind, in the provinces, curators are usually
appointed by the governor.

​(199) In order to prevent the property of wards and persons who are
under the charge of curators from being wasted or diminished in value by
their guardians and curators, it is the duty of the Prætor to compel
guardians and curators to furnish security for this purpose.

​(200) This, however, is not always the case, for guardians appointed by
will are not compelled to furnish security, because their fidelity and
diligence have been approved by the testator himself; and curators who
have not obtained their office by law, but who are appointed either by a
consul, a Prætor, or the governor of a province, are, for the most part,
not required to furnish security, for the reason that they have been
chosen on account of their being considered sufficiently trustworthy.

Original manuscript illegible.

* * * * *
