PREAMBLE.

OF THE INSTITUTES OR ELEMENTS OF OUR LORD THE MOST HOLY EMPEROR
JUSTINIAN.

IN THE NAME OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST.

The Emperor Cæsar, Flavius, Justinianus, Alemannicus, Gothicus,
Francicus, Germanicus, Anticus, Alanicus, Vandalicus, Africanus, Pious,
Happy, Renowned, Victor and Triumpher, ever Augustus, to the Youth
desirous of learning the laws.

It is expedient that the Imperial Majesty not only be distinguished by
arms, but also be protected by laws, so that government may be justly
administered in time of both war and peace, and the Roman Sovereign not
only may emerge victorious from battle with the enemy, but also by
legitimate measures may defeat the evil designs of wicked men and appear
as strict in the administration of justice as triumphant over conquered
foes.

\(1) This twofold task We have now accomplished, by means of the
greatest attention and care, and with the assistance of God. For
barbarous nations, subjected to Our authority, acknowledge Our warlike
exploits, and Africa, as well as other numerous provinces after so long
a period of time have submitted to the Roman domination, and have again
become a portion of Our Empire by means of Our conquests through the aid
of Celestial Power, and all peoples in fact, are now governed by laws
either promulgated or compiled by Us.

\(2) After having brought into perfect harmony the Imperial
Constitutions hitherto involved in confusion, We have directed Our
attention to the immense volumes of ancient jurisprudence, and have
finally accomplished this most difficult task, proceeding, as it were,
through the depths of the ocean, and aided by the favor of heaven.

\(3) This having been concluded through the Grace of God, We summoned
the illustrious Tribonian, Master and former Quæstor of Our Sacred
Palace, along with Theophilus and Dorotheus, eminent men and professors,
(whose skill, familiarity with the laws, and fidelity in obeying Our
orders We have proved on many occasions) and especially directed them to
draw up Institutes by Our authority, and with Our advice, that you may
be able to learn the first principles of the law, not from ancient
fables, but acquire them from the Imperial Splendor; so that your ears
as well as your minds may absorb nothing that is useless or incorrect,
but whatever is in accordance with reason in all things. And while, in
former times, it was scarcely possible for those who preceded you to
read the Imperial Constitutions in the course of four years, you may,
now, from the very beginning, proceed to do so; being found worthy of
such honor and happiness that both the beginning and the end of your
instruction in the laws issue from the mouth of your Sovereign.

\(4) Therefore, after the completion of the fifty books of the Digest or
Pandects, in which all the ancient law has been collected, and which We
have caused to be compiled by the said distinguished personage Tribonian
and other eminent and most illustrious men, We have ordered these
Institutes to be divided into the following four books, that they may
constitute the first elements of the entire science of jurisprudence.

\(5) In them a brief explanation has been made both of the principles
which formerly obtained, as well as of those which, after having been
obscured by disuse, have been illuminated once more by Imperial
restoration.

\(6) These Institutes collected from all those of the ancients and
especially from the Commentaries of Our Gaius, embracing not only what
is contained in his Institutes but also those of his work relating to
daily transactions and compiled from those of many others, the three
learned men aforesaid submitted to Us, and, after having read and
examined them, We have accorded to them the full authority of Our
Constitutions.

\(7) Accept, therefore, with the greatest ardor and alacrity, these Our
laws, and prove yourselves so well informed in them that, when your
course of law has been completed, the fairest hope may inspire you of
being competent to govern Our dominions in whatever parts of the same
the administration may be entrusted to you.

Given at Constantinople, on the eleventh day of the *Kalends* of
December, during the third Consulship of Our Lord Justinian, ever
Augustus.

THE INSTITUTES OF OUR LORD JUSTINIAN.

BOOK I.

TITLE I. \
CONCERNING JUSTICE AND LAW.

Justice is the constant and perpetual desire to give to each one that to
which he is entitled.

\(1) Jurisprudence is the knowledge of matters divine and human, and the
comprehension of what is just and what is unjust.

\(2) These divisions being generally understood, and We being about to
explain the laws of the Roman people, it appears that this may be most
conveniently done if separate subjects are at first treated in a clear
and simple manner, and afterwards with greater care and exactness; for
if We, at once, in the beginning, load the still uncultivated and
inexperienced mind of the student with a multitude and variety of
details, We shall bring about one of two things; that is, We shall
either cause him to abandon his studies, or, by means of excessive labor
--- and also with that distrust which very frequently discourages young
men --- conduct him to that point to which, if led by an easier route, he
might have been brought more speedily without much exertion and without
misgiving.

\(3) The following are the precepts of the Law: to live honestly, not to
injure another, and to give to each one that which belongs to him.

\(4) There are two branches of this study, namely: public and private.
Public Law is that which concerns the administration of the Roman
government; Private Law relates to the interests of individuals. Thus
Private Law is said to be threefold in its nature, for it is composed of
precepts of Natural Law, of those of the Law of Nations, and of those of
the Civil Law.

TITLE II.

CONCERNING NATURAL LAW, THE LAW OF NATIONS, AND THE CIVIL LAW.

Natural Law is that which nature has taught to all animals, for this law
is not peculiar to the human race, but applies to all creatures which
originate in the air, or the earth, and in the sea. Hence arises the
union of the male and the female which we designate marriage; and hence
are derived the procreation and the education of children; for we see
that other animals also act as though endowed with knowledge of this
law.

\(1) The Civil Law and the Law of Nations are divided as follows. All
peoples that are governed by laws and customs make use of the law which
is partly peculiar to themselves and partly pertaining to all men; for
what each people has established for itself is peculiar to that State,
and is styled the Civil Law; being, as it were, the especial law of that
individual commonwealth. But the law which natural reason has
established among all mankind and which is equally observed among all
peoples, is called the Law of Nations, as being that which all nations
make use of. The Roman people also employ a law which is in part
peculiar to them, and in part common to all men. We propose to set forth
their distinctions in their proper places.

\(2) The Civil Law derives its name from each state, as, for example,
that of the Athenians; for if anyone wishes to designate the laws of
Solon or of Draco as the Civil Law of Athens, he will not commit an
error; for in this manner We call the law which the Roman people use the
Civil Law of the Romans, or the *Jus Quiritium* employed by Roman
citizens, as the Romans are styled *Quirites* from Quirinus. When,
however, We do not add the name of the state, We mean Our own law; just
as when We mention *the poet* but do not give his name, the illustrious
Homer is understood among the Greeks, and Virgil among us.

The Law of Nations, however, Is common to the entire human race, for all
nations have established for themselves certain regulations exacted by
custom and human necessity. For wars have arisen, and captivity and
slavery, which are contrary to natural law, have followed as a result,
as, according to Natural Law, all men were originally born free; and
from this law nearly all contracts, such as purchase, sale, hire,
partnership, deposit, loan, and innumerable others have been derived.

\(3) Our Law, which We make use of, is either written or unwritten, just
as among the Greeks, written and unwritten laws exist. The written law
consists of the Statutes, the *Plebiscita*, the Decrees of the Senate,
the Decisions of the Emperors, the Orders of the Magistrates and the
Answers of Jurisconsults.

\(4) A Statute is what the Roman people have established as the result
of an interrogatory of a senatorial magistrate, for example, a consul.
The *Plebiscitum* is what the plebeians have established upon the
interrogatory of a plebeian magistrate, for instance, a tribune.
Plebeians differ from the people as a species does from a genus; for all
citizens, including even patricians, and senators, are understood by the
word people, and by the term plebeians all other citizens, exclusive of
patricians and senators, are designated. *Plebiscita* have had the same
force as statutes since the passage of the *Lex Hortensia*.

\(5) A Decree of the Senate is what the Senate orders and establishes,
for since the Roman people have increased in numbers to such an extent
that it is difficult for them to be convoked in an assembly for the
purpose of adopting a law, it has seemed advisable for the Senate to be
consulted instead of the people.

\(6) Whatever is approved by the sovereign has also the force of law,
because by the *Lex Regia*, from whence his power is derived, the people
have delegated to him all their jurisdiction and authority. Therefore,
whatever the Emperor establishes by means of a Rescript or decrees as a
magistrate, or commands by an Edict, stands as law, and these are called
Constitutions. Some of these are personal and are not considered as
precedents, because the sovereign does not wish them to be such; for any
favor he grants on account of merit, or where he inflicts punishment
upon anyone or affords him unusual assistance, this affects only the
individual concerned; the others, however, as they are of general
application unquestionably are binding upon all.

\(7) The Edicts of the Prætors also possess more than ordinary
authority, and we are accustomed to designate them "honorary" laws,
because they derive their force from those who are invested with honors,
that is to say magistrates. The Curule Ædiles, likewise, formerly
published edicts relative to certain matters which also constitute part
of the honorary law.

\(8) The Answers of Jurisconsults are the decisions and opinions of
persons upon whom has been conferred authority to establish laws; for it
was decided in ancient times that the laws should be publicly
interpreted by those to whom the right to answer had been granted by the
Emperor, and who were called jurisconsults, and the unanimous decisions
and opinions of the latter had such force that, according to the
Constitutions, a judge was not permitted to deviate from what they had
determined.

\(9) The unwritten law is that which usage has confirmed, for customs
long observed and sanctioned by the consent of those who employ them,
resemble law.

\(10) Not improperly does the Civil Law appear to have been divided into
two branches; since in its origin it seems to have been derived from the
institutions of two states, namely, Athens, and Lacedæmon; for in these
states it was the practice for the Lacedæmonians to commit to memory the
rules which served them as laws, and the Athenians, on the other hand,
observed whatever legal regulations which they had reduced to writing.

\(11) Natural Laws that are observed without distinction by all nations
and have been established by Divine Providence remain always fixed and
unchangeable; but those which every State establishes for itself are
often changed either by the tacit consent of the people, or by some
other law subsequently enacted.

\(12) Every law of which We make use has reference either to persons, to
things, or to actions. We shall first treat of persons, for there is
little advantage in being familiar with the law if the persons on
account of whom it was adopted are unknown.^1^

^1^ Roman legislation begins with the *Leges Regiæ, *the enactments
passed by the *Comitia*, or assemblies of the people, with the sanction
of the sovereign, or rather by his direction, for his influence and
authority long were paramount. The *Leges Regiæ* were generally of a
religious or social character, and some of them, if not all, can lay
claim to a much higher antiquity than the Twelve Tables. They

TITLE III. CONCERNING THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS.

The principal division of the law of persons is this, that all men are
either free or slaves.

\(1) Freedom (from which is derived the designation free) is the natural
right enjoyed by each one to do as he pleases, unless prevented by force
or by law.

\(2) Slavery is a provision of the Law of Nations by means of which one
person is subjected to the authority of another, contrary to nature.

\(3) Slaves are so called because generals order captives to be sold,
and in this way to be preserved instead of being put to death; and they

dealt rather with moral duties and the ceremonial of pagan worship than
with secular regulations, and bear convincing evidence of sacerdotal
origin, which is especially apparent in those attributed to Numa
Pompilius. These rules were compiled during the infancy of the Republic
by Papirius, a member of the College of Pontiffs.

During the early days of Rome, all judicial and sacerdotal authority ---
civil, criminal, and religious --- was vested in the Chief of the State,
in this instance, in the King. We have, of course, no authentic record
giving details of the legal foundation and original polity of the
greatest city of the ancient world; and the legendary history of those
distant times is so involved in obscurity that it is now impossible to
discriminate between even probability and mere tradition, or between the
true and the fabulous. With the few reliable data at our command,
however, and judging from analogy, there can be no question of the
summary jurisdiction enjoyed by the first Roman Kings in all matters
affecting the welfare of the people, who were presumed to have delegated
their authority to them.

The rights and obligations of the various orders of the State were
defined as follows during the reign of Romulus. "*Ac regi quidem haecce
attribuit iura: primum ut sacrorum et sacrificiorum haberet principatum,
tum ut legum morumque patriorum esset custos, de guauioribus delictis
ipse cognosceret, leuiora senatoribus committeret, senatum cogeret et
populum conuocaret, et in bello summum haberet imperium*.

"*Consilio senatus hanc potestatem dedit, ut deliberaret et suffragium
ferret de qualibet re, quam rex ad eum retulisset*.

"*Populo uero haec tria concessit, magistratus creare et leges sancire
et de bello decernere, quando rex rogationem ad eum tulisset. Suffragia
autem ferebat non simul totus populus, sed curiatim conuocatus." (Fontes
Juris Romani Antejustinlani, Leges Regiæ*, Page 7.)

Religious dogmas, at all times, played a most important role in the
formation of Roman jurisprudence. Some of the principles and rules
derived from this source persisted even until the closing days of the
Empire. The College of Pontiffs, whose province, in the beginning,
embraced only questions connected with sacred subjects, became
subsequently the custodian of secular laws. The absolute separation of
what is now known as Church and State was never effected. The authority
of both was centered in the Emperor, who was invested with the dignity
of Pontifex Maximus. The religious element of the Roman Constitution was
always powerful, not infrequently predominant, during the existence of
the Republic. The Twelve Tables, the first statutory enactments adopted
by the Romans, contained many precepts enjoining observances of a
strictly religious nature, some of which, in a fragmentary but legible
condition, have come down to us. This potent sacerdotal influence can be
traced through all subsequent legislation; was recognized by the most
renowned sovereigns, sometimes with sincere reverence, but in general as
a matter of state policy; and appears in many of the laws of Justinian.
It had no little effect in founding and promoting the irresponsible,
arrogant, and far reaching domination of the Popes, the legitimate
successors of the Cæsars. --- ED.

are also called *mancipia*, for the reason that they are taken from the
enemy by the hand.

\(4) Moreover, slaves are either born or become such. They are born such
when they owe their origin to our female slaves, and they become such by
the Law of Nations through captivity, or in accordance with the Civil
Law; as where a man who is free and over twenty years of age permits
himself to be sold in order to obtain a portion of the price.

\(5) No difference exists in the condition of slaves, but among freemen
there are several distinctions for they are either born free, or
manumitted.

TITLE IV. CONCERNING FREEBORN PERSONS.

A freeborn person is one who is free from the instant of his birth,
whether he be the issue of a marriage between two freeborn persons, or
that of two persons who have been liberated from slavery, or that of a
person who has been liberated and one who was born free. Moreover,
anyone who is born of a free mother and whose father is a slave is,
nevertheless, born a freeman; just as he who is born of a free mother
and an unknown father, because he was conceived in promiscuous
intercourse. It is also sufficient if his mother was free when he was
born, although she may have been a slave at the time of conception. And,
on the other hand, if a freewoman should conceive, and afterwards having
become a slave should bring forth, it has been decided that the child is
born free, because the misfortune of the mother should not be a source
of injury to her unborn child. From this fact the following question
arose, namely, whether a pregnant female slave who has been set free and
having again become a slave, brings forth a child, shall it be
considered freeborn or a slave? It is the opinion of Marcellus that the
child is born free, for it is sufficient while yet unborn for its mother
to have been free, even for an intermediate period, which we hold to be
true.

\(1) Anyone who has been born free is not prejudiced by having been
reduced to slavery and subsequently manumitted, for it has very
frequently been determined that manumission is not detrimental to the
privileges of birth.

TITLE V. CONCERNING FREEDMEN.

Freedmen are those who have been manumitted from legal servitude.
Manumission is the bestowal of freedom, for so long as anyone is in
slavery he is subject to the control and authority of a master, but when
manumitted he is delivered from his power. This proceeding derives its
origin from the Law of Nations, since, according to Natural Law all men
are born free, manumission could not exist as long as slavery was
unknown, but after it was introduced by the Law of Nations the privilege
of manumission followed; and although, originally,

all men were designated by a common name, afterwards, by the Law of
Nations, three different kinds of persons began to be recognized,
namely: freemen; their opposite, slaves; and a third class, freedmen,
who had ceased to be slaves.

\(1) Manumission is accomplished in many ways, in the holy churches in
accordance with the Imperial Constitutions; by the wand of the Prætor;
in the presence of friends; by letter; by testament, or by any other
indication of one's last will. There are also many other methods that
have been introduced by ancient Constitutions as well as by Our own, by
means of which freedom may be bestowed upon a slave.

\(2) Again, masters can always manumit their slaves, and they can even
do so while walking in the street; for instance, while the Prætor, the
Proconsul, or the Governor is going to the bath or the theatre.

Moreover, the condition of freedmen in former times was threefold, for
as soon as they were manumitted they sometimes obtained entire and legal
liberty and became Roman citizens; sometimes they acquired an inferior
species of freedom and, by the *Lex Junia Norbana* they became Latins;
and then, again, they obtained a still less degree of freedom, and
according to the *Lex Ælia, Sentia* they were classed among the
*dedititii. *This lowest condition of *dedititii* has long ago fallen
into desuetude, and, indeed -the name of Latins is no longer frequently
employed. Hence, Our good-will being desirous to improve all things and
to ameliorate the condition of mankind has corrected this by two
Constitutions, and restored the matter to its former status; because at
the foundation of the City of Rome only one kind of freedom existed,
which was the same that the manumitting party enjoyed; except where he
who was liberated was a freedman, and the party who manumitted him was
freeborn. Wherefore We have abolished the class of *dedititii* by one of
Our Constitutions which We promulgated among Our Decisions, by means of
which, at the suggestion of that illustrious man the Quæstor Tribonian,
We have settled the disputed question of the ancient law. At the
suggestion of the same Quæstor We have also reformed the condition of
the Junian Latins and everything relating to them, by another
Constitution which is conspicuous among the Imperial Edicts, and have
rendered all freedmen Roman citizens without making any distinction with
reference to age, the mode of manumission, or the authority of the
manumitting party, as was formerly the practice; and have added several
other methods by means of which freedom, together with Roman
citizenship, which is the only kind that exists at the present time, may
be conferred upon slaves.

TITLE VI.

WHO CANNOT MANUMIT OTHERS, AND WHY THEY ARE UNABLE TO DO SO.

No one, however, has the right to confer manumission whenever he wishes
to do so; for if it is done to defraud creditors the act is void,

because the *Lex Ælia Sentia* prevents freedom under such circumstances.

\(1) A master who is not solvent may, however, by will appoint his slave
his heir, and give him his liberty so that he becomes free and his sole
and necessary heir; provided no other heir is created by said will,
either because no one has been appointed an heir by the same, or because
he who was appointed did not for some reason or other become the heir.
This provision has been made by the said *Lex Ælia, Sentia*, and justly,
for it was necessary to provide that persons in reduced circumstances
who had no other heirs, might constitute their slaves their necessary
heirs for the purpose of satisfying their creditors; or, if they did not
do this, the creditors could sell the property of the estate in the name
of the slave, so that no ignominy might attach to the memory of the
deceased.

\(2) The same rule applies even where the slave has been appointed an
heir without receiving his freedom, and this Our Constitution has
established on a new basis of humanity, not only with reference to a
master who is insolvent but generally; and liberty is bestowed upon the
slave by the very document in which he was appointed an heir, for it is
not probable that he who selected him as his heir and omitted to grant
him freedom wished him to remain a slave, and that there should be no
heir to his estate.

\(3) He is deemed to have granted manumission in fraud of his creditors
who, either at the time when he did so was insolvent, or who having
bestowed freedom became insolvent by that act. Still, it seems to have
been established that the grant of freedom would not be prevented,
unless the manumitting party had the intention to defraud, even though
he did not have sufficient property to satisfy his creditors; for men
often except more from their resources than they are worth. We
understand then that the grant of freedom is void when creditors are
defrauded in one of two ways, that is to say by the design of the
manumitting party and by the fact itself, where the property is not
sufficient to pay the creditors.

\(4) According to the same *Lex Æ*lia* Sentia*,^1^** where the master is
under twenty years of age he is not permitted to manumit anyone except
by means of the wand of the Prætor, and after a legal cause for doing so
has been established in the presence of the Council.

\(5) The legal causes of manumission are the following: for example,
where anyone desires to liberate from slavery his own father, mother,
son, daughter, brother or sister, or his attendant, his nurse, his
foster-father, his foster-child, his foster-son or foster-daughter, his
foster-brother, a male slave for the sake of making him his agent, a
female slave for the purpose of marrying her (provided she becomes his
wife within six months and no lawful impediment exists). Where a slave
is manumitted in order to be made an agent he must be at the time not
less than seventeen years of age.

^1^ The *Lex Ælia Sentia* restricted the right of manumission by the
masters of criminal slaves, who were thus enabled to avoid
responsibility for their acts. --- ED.

\(6) When a reason has once been approved, whether it be true or false,
it shall not subsequently be reconsidered.

\(7) Therefore, as a particular method of manumission by will was
established by the *Lex Ælia Sentia* in the case of masters who are
minors under twenty years of age, the result was that while anyone who
was fourteen years old could make a will and thereby appoint an heir for
himself and bequeath legacies, still he could not grant freedom to a
slave if he was at the time less than twenty years old. As it, however,
appeared intolerable that power to dispose of all his property by will
should be conferred upon anyone, and that he should not be allowed to
grant liberty to a single slave; then why should We not permit him to
dispose of his slaves by his last will in any manner he wishes --- just as
he can do with his other property --- in order that he may be able to
grant them freedom? But as liberty is an invaluable possession, and for
this reason antiquity forbade it to be conferred upon a slave by anyone
under twenty years of age; therefore We, to a certain extent, selecting
a middle course, have granted the right to a minor under twenty years of
age to confer freedom upon his slave by will, provided he has completed
his seventeenth year and entered his eighteenth. For as the ancients
permitted persons of this age to appear in court in behalf of others,
why should it not be believed that their soundness of judgment is
sufficient to entitle them to enjoy the privilege of granting freedom to
their slaves?

TITLE VII.

CONCERNING THE ABROGATION OF THE LEX FURIA CANINIA.

A certain method was prescribed by the *Lex Furia Caninia* for the
testamentary manumission of slaves; but We have determined that this
should be abrogated as being a hindrance to liberty and to some extent
odious; for it was positively unkind to permit living persons to have
the power to manumit all their slaves where no other impediment existed,
and to refuse that privilege to dying persons.

TITLE VIII.

CONCERNING THOSE WHO ARE THEIR OWN MASTERS, OR ARE UNDER THE CONTROL OF
OTHERS.

Another division of the law of persons follows here, for some persons
are independent, and some are subject to the authority of others; and
again of the latter some are under the control of their parents, and
others under that of their masters. We shall first treat of those who
are subject to the authority of others, for when We ascertain who these
persons are, We shall, at the same time, know who those are that are
independent.

In the first place let Us consider those who are under the control of
their masters.

\(1) Slaves are under the control of their masters, and this authority
is derived from the Law of Nations, for We can perceive that among
almost all nations masters have the right of life and death over their
slaves, and that whatever is acquired by a slave belongs to his
master.^1^

\(2) At the present time, however, no persons who are subject to Our
authority are permitted, unless for a reason recognized by the laws, to
exercise unusual cruelty against their slaves; for by a Constitution of
the Divine Pius Antoninus he who kills his slave without a reason shall
not be punished with less severity than he who kills the slave of
another; and by the Constitution of the same sovereign the excessive
severity of masters is still further repressed; for, having been
consulted by certain governors of provinces with reference to slaves who
flee for refuge to a sacred edifice or to the statues of the Emperors,
he decreed that if the barbarity of the masters appeared to be
intolerable, they could be forced to sell their slaves under favorable
conditions and have the price paid to them, which is a just provision;
for it is to the interest of the State that no one abuse his property.

The following are the terms of the rescript addressed to Ælius
Martianus: "It is necessary that the power of masters over their slaves
should be unimpaired, and that no man should be deprived of his right,
but it is to the interest of masters that relief against rage,
starvation, or intolerable injury should not be denied to those who
justly implore it. Therefore, take cognizance of the complaints of the
slaves of Julius Sabinus who have fled for refuge to the statue; and if
you find that they have been treated with more harshness than is just,
or have suffered any infamous injury, order them to be sold, so that
they may not be restored to the power of their master; and if he seeks
by fraud to escape the effect of My Constitution let him know that I
will take more rigorous measures."

TITLE IX. CONCERNING PATERNAL AUTHORITY.

Our children, the issue of lawful marriage, are in our power.

\(1) Marriage, or matrimony, is the union of man and wife entailing the
obligation to live together.

\(2) The authority which We exercise over Our children is peculiar to
Roman citizens, for there are no other men who have such control over
their children as We have.

\(3) Therefore, whoever is born of yourself and your wife is under your
authority just as he who is born of your son and his wife, that is to
say, your grandson and your granddaughter are also under your authority,
just as your great-grandson and great-granddaughter, and all others in
succession; but a child born of your daughter is not under your
authority, but under that of its father.

^1^ "*Quicquid acquiritur servo acquiritur domino.*" --- ED.

TITLE X. CONCERNING MARRIAGE.

Roman citizens unite in legal marriage when they are joined according to
the precepts of the law, and the males have attained the age of puberty
and the females are capable of child-birth, whether they are the heads
of families or the children of families; if the latter have also the
consent of the relatives under whose authority they may be, for this
should be obtained and both civil and natural law require that it should
previously be secured. Wherefore it has been asked whether the daughter
of an insane person could be married, or the son of an insane person
take a wife; and as various opinions prevailed with regard to the son,
We have rendered a decision by which it is permitted that the son of an
insane person, just as the daughter of one, can also in a way prescribed
by Our Constitution contract marriage without the intervention of his
father.

\(1) We cannot, however, marry every woman, for we must refrain from
contracting matrimony with some of them.

Hence, marriage cannot take place where the relationship of parents or
children exists; as, for instance, between father and daughter,
grandfather and granddaughter, mother and son, grandmother and grandson,
and so on with respect to all other degrees; and if such persons cohabit
with one another they are said to have contracted an infamous and
incestuous marriage.

These principles are so generally applicable that even if the parties
stand in the relationship of parents or children to one another by
adoption they cannot be united in matrimony; and even after the adoption
has been dissolved the same legal restriction exists; and therefore you
cannot take as a wife any woman who has been your adopted daughter or
granddaughter, even though you may have emancipated her.

\(2) A similar rule applies to persons related in the collateral degree,
but this is not so strict. Marriage is indeed prohibited between brother
and sister, whether they are the issue of the same father or mother, or
of either of them; but where a woman becomes your sister by adoption,
marriage cannot be contracted between yourself and her as long as the
adoption exists, but after the adoption has been dissolved by
emancipation, you can marry her, and also if you have been emancipated
no impediment to the marriage exists. For this reason the rule has been
established that if anyone desires to adopt his son-in-law, he must
first emancipate his daughter; and if anyone wishes to adopt his
daughter-in-law, he must previously emancipate his son.

\(3) It is illegal to marry the daughter of your brother or sister; nor
can anyone marry the granddaughter of his brother or sister, although
they are related in the fourth degree; for whenever it is not lawful to
contract matrimony with the daughter of anyone, marriage with his
granddaughter is also prohibited. You are, however, not prevented from
marrying the daughter of a woman adopted by your father, for the reason
that she is not related to you either by natural or civil law.

\(4) The children of two brothers or sisters, or of a brother and a
sister, can marry.

\(5) Moreover, a man cannot marry his paternal aunt, even though she may
have been adopted, nor can he marry his maternal aunt, because they
stand in the relationship of progenitors; and for the same reason you
are very properly forbidden to marry your great aunt, either on your
father's or your mother's side.

\(6) It is also necessary to avoid matrimony with some women on account
of the respect entertained for affinity. For example, to marry either a
step-daughter or a daughter-in-law is not permitted for the reason that
they both stand in the relationship of daughters; but it must be
understood that the woman in question has been either a daughter-in-law
or a step-daughter, for if she is still a daughter-in-law and married to
your son you cannot take her as a wife for another reason, that is,
because the same woman cannot be married to two men; and if she is still
your step-daughter, that is to say, if her mother is married to you, you
cannot contract matrimony with her because it is not lawful to have two
wives at the same time.

\(7) To marry a mother-in-law or a step-mother is also prohibited,
because of their maternal relationship, and this rule also applies only
after the affinity has ceased to exist; otherwise, if she is still your
step-mother and married to your father, you are prevented from marrying
her by the general rule that the same woman cannot be married to two
men; and if she is still your mother-in-law, that is, if her daughter is
still married to you, the marriage cannot take place for the reason that
you cannot have two wives at the same time.

\(8) The son of a husband by another wife and the daughter of a wife by
another husband, or *vice-versa*, can lawfully contract matrimony,
although they may have a brother or sister who is the issue of the
marriage subsequently contracted.

\(9) Where your wife after having been divorced has a daughter by
another husband, the latter is not your step-daughter, but Julianus says
you should abstain from marriage with a woman of this kind; for the
betrothed of your son is not your daughter-in-law, nor the betrothed of
your father, your mother-in-law, still those who avoid marriage with
persons of this description act more properly and legally.

\(10) That relationship existing among slaves is an impediment to
marriage is certain where a father and daughter, or a brother and sister
have been manumitted.

\(11) There are also other persons who, for different reasons, are
prohibited from contracting matrimony, and these We have permitted to be
enumerated in the books of the Digest or Pandects compiled from the
ancient law.

\(12) Where persons cohabit in violation of the laws which We have
prescribed, neither the relationship of husband or wife, nor a nuptial
ceremony, marriage or dowry is understood to exist; hence those who are
born from this intercourse are not under the authority of their fathers,
but so far as relates to said authority are in the same category as
those whom a mother has conceived in promiscuous inter-

course; for these also are understood to have no father, as the latter
is uncertain; hence they are ordinarily designated spurious children,
either from a Greek word meaning "conceived at random", or because they
are children without a father. It follows, therefore, that where an
union of this kind is dissolved there is no claim for the return of the
dowry; and, moreover, those who contract prohibited marriage are liable
to other penalties which are set forth in the Imperial Constitutions.

\(13) It sometimes happens that children are not under paternal
authority when they are born, but are afterwards subjected to it. Such a
one is he who being a natural son, is subsequently brought under the
control of his father through becoming a member of the *curia*. He also
belongs to this class who is born of a free woman with whom matrimony
was by no means forbidden by the laws but with whom his father was
accustomed to cohabit; and who was afterwards brought under the
authority of his father by means of dotal instruments executed in
accordance with the provisions of Our Constitution. Our Constitution
likewise gives him this advantage, even though there are other children
the issue of the same marriage.

TITLE XL CONCERNING ADOPTION.

Not only are Our natural children under Our authority as We have already
stated, but those whom We adopt as well.

\(1) Adoption is accomplished in two ways, either by Imperial Rescript
or by the order of a magistrate. By the authority of the Emperor anyone
can adopt persons of either sex who are their own masters, and this kind
of adoption is styled arrogation. By order of a magistrate it is lawful
for anyone to adopt persons of either sex who are under paternal
control, whether they belong to the first degree of descendants, as, a
son or a daughter, or to an inferior degree, as a grandson or a
granddaughter, a great-grandson or a great-granddaughter.

\(2) At present, however, in compliance with one of Our Constitutions,
when the son of a family is bestowed in adoption by his natural father
upon a stranger, his natural father's rights to authority are by no
means abrogated, nor do any of them pass to the adoptive father, nor is
the son subject to his control, although he is permitted by Us to enjoy
the rights of succession if his adoptive father dies intestate. Where,
however, his natural father gave his son in adoption, not to a stranger,
but to the maternal grandfather of his son; or if his natural father had
been emancipated and gave him in adoption even to his paternal
grandfather or great-grandfather, or to his maternal greatgrandfather in
like manner; in these instances, as both the natural rights and those of
adoption are united in one and the same person, the power of the
adoptive father remains fixed, being connected by the natural bond and
strengthened by the legitimate method of adoption,

so that the son both belongs to the family and is subject to the
paternal authority of an adoptive father of this kind.

\(3) When, however, a person who has not reached the age of puberty is
arrogated by Imperial Rescript, arrogation is only permitted after the
circumstances have been thoroughly investigated, and the reason for
arrogation examined to ascertain whether it is honorable and beneficial
to the minor; and the arrogation must be established under certain
conditions, that is to say, the adopting party must give security to
some public personage, namely a notary, that if the minor should die
before reaching puberty, he will surrender his property to those who
would have been entitled to the succession if the adoption had not taken
place.

Again, an arrogator cannot emancipate his adoptive children unless,
after proper investigation, they are found worthy of emancipation, and
he must then restore their property to them. And again, if a father,
when dying, disinherits his adoptive son, or, while living, emancipates
him without just cause, he is required to give him the fourth part of
his property, in addition to what he brought to his adoptive father and
of which he subsequently obtained for him the benefit.

\(4) It is held that a minor cannot adopt anyone older than himself, for
adoption imitates nature, and it is monstrous that a son should be older
than his father. Therefore, he who takes for himself a son either by
arrogation or adoption should do so by full puberty, that is he should
be his senior by eighteen years.

\(5) It is also lawful to adopt a person to occupy the place of a
grandson, or a great-grandson, a granddaughter or a great-granddaughter,
or of any descendant further removed, although the party may have no
son.

\(6) Anyone can also adopt the son of another as his own grandson, or
another person's grandson as his son.

\(7) Where, however, anyone adopts a person instead of his grandson
either as the child of a son whom he has already adopted, or in the
place of the child of a son under his authority, in this instance the
son should consent, in order that he may not be given a proper heir in
spite of himself; but, on the other hand, where a grandfather gives his
grandson in adoption it is not necessary for his son to consent.

\(8) An adopted or arrogated son in many respects resembles one born
into lawful wedlock, and therefore if anyone adopts another by Imperial
Rescript, or before the Prajtor or the Governor of a province and the
adopted party is not a stranger, he can give him in adoption to another.

\(9) It is a regulation common to both kinds of adoption that those who
cannot beget, for instance, such as are born without procreative power,
like natural eunuchs, can adopt; but persons who have been castrated
cannot do so.

\(10) Women also cannot adopt because they have not even control over
their own children, but by the indulgence of the Emperor they can do so
by way of consolation of the children they have lost.

\(11) It is also peculiar to the adoption which is effected by rescript
that where a man who has children under his authority permits himself to
be arrogated, not only he himself is brought under the power of the
party adopting him, but his children are also subjected to the authority
of the latter as grandchildren; and in accordance with this rule, the
Divine Augustus did not adopt Tiberius until he himself had adopted
Germanicus, so that he might begin to be the grandson of Augustus
immediately after the adoption occurred.

\(12) Antiquity ascribes an appropriate statement to Cato, namely, that
where slaves are adopted by their master they are liberated by his very
act; and therefore We, accepting this opinion, have inserted in one of
Our Constitutions that when a master has mentioned his slave as a son in
a public instrument he shall be free, although this is not sufficient to
invest him with the rights of a son.

TITLE XII. IN WHAT WAYS THE RIGHT OF PATERNAL POWER Is ABROGATED.

Let Us examine now by what methods those subjected to the authority of
others are liberated from this authority.

We can learn from what We explained above with regard to the manumission
of slaves in what way they are released from this restraint.

Those, however, who are under the control of a relative become
independent at his death, but this admits of a distinction; for, without
question, when a father dies, his son and daughter, in every instance,
become their own masters. Where, however, a grandfather dies, his
grandsons and granddaughters do not invariably become independent, but
only where after the death of their grandfather they do not again become
subject to the authority of their father. Therefore, if when the
grandfather dies their father is still living and under the authority of
his father, then, after the death of their grandfather they become
subject to the authority of their father; but if at the time their
grandfather died their father was either dead, or had passed from under
the control of his father, then the said grandchildren become their own
masters, because they cannot become subject to his authority.

\(1) But when one who has been banished to some island on account of a
crime forfeits his citizenship, it follows that the children of a person
removed in this way from the body of Roman citizens cease to be under
his control, just as if he were dead. For a similar reason, if anyone
under paternal authority is banished to an island, he ceases to be under
the control of his relatives; but if restored by Imperial clemency, such
a person regains his former status in every respect.

\(2) Fathers who have been temporarily banished to an island retain
authority over their children, and, on the other hand, children banished
under such circumstances, remain subject to parental control.

\(3) Anyone who is made a slave by way of punishment ceases to have
authority over his children, and persons are made slaves by way

of punishment who are sentenced to the mines or are exposed to wild
beasts.

\(4) Where the son of a family serves in the army or becomes a Senator
or Consul, he still continues in the power of his father, for neither
military service nor the consular dignity releases a son from paternal
control. However, in accordance with one of Our Constitutions, the
highest patrician rank releases him who receives it from paternal
authority as soon as the Imperial grant is delivered; for who could
tolerate that a father should have the power to release his son from the
ties of his authority by means of emancipation, while the Imperial
Dignity could not avail to liberate from the control of another him whom
he selected as a father for himself.

\(5) Where a father has been captured by the enemy, although he
temporarily becomes the slave of the latter, nevertheless, by the law of
*postliminium* his power over his children only remains in abeyance;
because if those who have been captured by the enemy return, they
recover all their former rights; and therefore, on his return, he will
have his children under his authority, because the law of *postliminium*
gives rise to the fiction that a captive has never been absent; but if
he should die in captivity, his son becomes his own master from the
moment when his father was made prisoner. Again, if a son or a grandson
is captured by the enemy, We declare that, in like manner the right of
paternal authority is suspended by the law of *postliminium*.

The term *postliminium* is derived from *limen* and *post, *so that We
speak correctly when We say that a man who has been captured by the
enemy and afterwards comes within our boundaries returns by
*postliminium:* for as threshholds form a kind of boundary in houses,
the ancients also considered the boundary of the Empire as a threshhold.
From this likewise is derived the term *limes* which is, as it were, an
end and boundary. *Postliminium*, therefore, is so designated because a
person returns by the identical threshhold from which he was lost.
Anyone who is recovered from conquered enemies is deemed to have
returned by *postliminium*.

\(6) Children also cease to be under the control of their ascendants by
emancipation, and this emancipation was formerly brought about by the
ancient observance of the law, which was effected by means of fictitious
sales and intermediate manumissions, or by Imperial Rescript. Our
foresight, however, has, by means of a Constitution, brought about a
change for the better, so that the ancient fiction having been exploded,
relatives can go directly before competent judges or magistrates, and
personally release from their authority their sons or daughters,
grandsons or granddaughters, or other more remote descendants. And then,
according to the Edict of the Prætor, the same rights are granted to the
relatives with reference to the property of the said son or daughter,
grandson or granddaughter who has been manumitted by the said relative,
as are conferred upon a patron with reference to the property of his
freedman; and, moreover, if the son or daughter, or the other
descendants have not arrived at puberty, the relative obtains
guardianship over them by reason of the emancipation.

\(7) We must also bear in mind that anyone who has a son under his
control as well as a grandson or granddaughter by him, is perfectly free
to release his son from his authority and to retain his grandson or
granddaughter under it; and, on the other hand, to retain his son in his
own power and manumit his grandson or granddaughter (and it must be
understood that the same rule is applicable to a great-grandson or a
great-granddaughter), or to render them all their own masters.

\(8) But where a father who has a son under his control gives him in
adoption to his natural grandfather, or great-grandfather, in accordance
with Our Constitutions enacted for this purpose; that is to say, if he
manifests this intention by a proper instrument executed in the presence
of a competent magistrate, the party who is to be adopted being present
at the time and not offering any opposition --- and if the party who makes
the adoption does not do so --- the right of the natural parent is
extinguished and passes to the adoptive father in this manner; with
respect to whom, as We previously stated, the adoption is absolutely
complete.

\(9) It should also be noted that if your daughter-in-law conceives by
your son and you subsequently emancipate the latter, or give him in
adoption while your daughter-in-law is pregnant, the child brought forth
by her is nevertheless born under your authority; but where it is
conceived after emancipation or adoption, it is subject to the authority
of its adoptive father or grandfather.

\(10) It is further to be noted that there is scarcely any way by which
either natural or adopted children can force an ascendant to liberate
them from his control.

TITLE XIII.

CONCERNING GUARDIANSHIP.

Let Us pass now to another division of persons; for of those who are not
under paternal authority some are under guardianship or curalorship, and
others are subject to neither of these rights. Let Us, therefore, direct
Our attention to those who are under guardianship or curatorship, and in
this manner We shall become familiar with those other persons who are
subject to neither of these restraints.

Let Us first consider those who are under guardianship.

\(1) Guardianship, as Servius defines it, is the right and authority
over a free person granted and allowed by the Civil Law for the
protection of one who, on account of his age, cannot protect himself.

\(2) Guardians are those who are invested with this power and authority,
from which very fact they have obtained their name, and they are
therefore called guardians from being protectors and defenders, just as
those who have charge of temples are called guardians of temples.

\(3) Parents, therefore, are allowed to appoint guardians by will for
children not arrived at puberty and who are under their control, and
this applies to all cases where a son or daughter are concerned.

For grandsons or granddaughters, however, parents can only appoint
guardians where, after their death, they will not be again brought under
the authority of their fathers. Hence, if at the time of your death,
your son is under your control, your grandsons by him cannot have a
guardian appointed by your will, even though they were under your
authority; because it is evident that, when you are dead they will again
come under the control of their father.

\(4) But, as in many instances posthumous children are considered as
already born, it has been decided that under such circumstances
testamentary guardians can be appointed as well for posthumous children
as for those already in existence, provided their condition is such that
if they had been born while their parents were living, they would have
been their heirs and under their control. Where, however, a guardian is
appointed by the will of a father for an emancipated son, he must in
every instance be confirmed by order of the Governor, and this is to be
done without investigation.

TITLE XIV. WHO CAN BE APPOINTED TESTAMENTARY GUARDIANS.

Not only the father of a family but also a son who belongs to it can be
appointed a guardian.

\(1) The slave of a testator can be legally appointed guardian and at
the same time given his freedom; but it must be noted that when he is
appointed guardian without being set free, he is presumed tacitly to
have received his freedom, and on this account he can legally act; but
it is evident that if he is appointed guardian under the presumption
that he is free, the case is different. The slave of another cannot,
however, unreservedly be appointed a testamentary guardian, but the
appointment is valid when it is stated that it will take effect when he
shall become free. It is, however, not valid for a person's own slave to
be appointed in this manner.

\(2) An insane person or a minor under twenty-five years of age when
appointed guardian by will can act as such when he becomes sane or
reaches the age of twenty-five years.

\(3) There is no question that a guardian can be appointed up to a
certain time, or from a certain date, or under some condition, or before
the institution of an heir.

\(4) A guardian cannot, however, be appointed on account of some certain
transaction or property, for the reason that the appointment is made
with reference to the person, and not on account of any business
transaction or property.

\(5) Where anyone has appointed guardians for his daughters or sons, it
is understood that he has appointed them also for any posthumous
daughter or son, because such children are included in the term
"posthumous". But in case there are many grandsons, are guardians to be
appointed for them under the designation of sons? It must be held that
they also appear to be appointed for them, if the party made

use of the word "children"; but the case is otherwise if he used the
word "sons", for sons are designated by one term and grandsons by
another. It is evident that if he made the appointment for posthumous
children both posthumous sons and other descendants will be included.

TITLE XV. CONCERNING THE LEGAL GUARDIANSHIP OF AGNATES.

By a law of the Twelve Tables agnates are the guardians of those for
whom no testamentary guardian has been appointed and these are called
legal guardians.

\(1) Agnates are persons connected by relationship through individuals
of the male sex, that is to say, related on the father's side; as, for
instance, a brother born of the same father, the son of that brother,
and his grandson by the said son; also a paternal uncle, the son of that
paternal uncle, and his grandson by that son. Those who are connected by
relationship through individuals of the female sex are not agnates but,
on the other hand, are cognates by natural law; therefore, the son of
your father's sister is not your agnate but your cognate; and, on the
other hand, you are certainly connected with him by the same rule,
because children follow the family of the father and not that of the
mother.

\(2) The law which appoints agnates guardians in case of intestacy not
only has this application where a man who has the right to appoint
guardians does not make a will, but also when he dies intestate so far
as the guardianship is concerned; which is also understood to take place
where the party appointed guardian dies while the testator is still
alive.

\(3) The law of agnation is usually abrogated in every respect by the
forfeiture of civil rights; for consanguinity on the male side is merely
a legal term. The law of relationship on the female side is not,
however, entirely altered for the above reason, because while a Civil
Law principle may abrogate civil rights, it can under no circumstances
abrogate those which are natural.

TITLE XVI. CONCERNING THE Loss OF CIVIL RIGHTS.

The loss of civil rights is a change of former status, and takes place
in three ways, for it may be the greatest; the lesser, which some
persons call intermediate; or the least.

\(1) The greatest loss of civil rights is where anyone forfeits at the
same time both citizenship and freedom. This occurs in the case of those
who are made slaves by way of punishment through the severity of their
sentences; or where freedmen are condemned for having been ungrateful to
their patrons; or where parties suffer themselves to be sold for the
purpose of sharing in the price.

\(2) Less, or intermediate loss of civil rights, is where citizenship
itself is lost but freedom is retained; which occurs when a person is

interdicted from fire and water, or is banished for an indefinite term
to some island.

\(3) The least loss of civil rights is when both citizenship or liberty
are retained, but the condition of the individual is altered; which
happens when those who were formerly their own masters are subjected to
the authority of another, or *vice-versa*.

\(4) A manumitted slave loses no civil rights because he did not possess
any.

\(5) Those persons whose dignity rather than their condition is altered
do not forfeit their civil rights; and therefore it is settled that
expulsion from the Senate involves no such forfeiture.

\(6) When it was stated that the right of cognation persisted after the
loss of civil rights, it is to be understood that this is the case where
the least of such losses takes place, for it is under such circumstances
that the cognation remains. But where the greatest loss of civil rights
occurs, the right of cognation is lost; for instance, by the enslavement
of any relative on the female side, and even when such a person is
manumitted he does not recover his right; and also where anyone is
deported to an island his cognation is lost.

\(7) When guardianship devolves upon persons related on the male side it
does not devolve upon all of them at once, but only upon such as are
related in the nearest degree, or upon all, if they are of the same
degree.

TITLE XVII. CONCERNING THE LEGAL GUARDIANSHIP OF PATRONS.

By the same Law of the Twelve Tables the guardianship of male and female
persons who have been set free belongs to their patrons and to the
children of the latter, which is also called legal guardianship; not
because by that law special provision has been made for it, but for the
reason that the interpretation of said law justifies this conclusion
just as if it had been verbally set forth in the same. For from the very
fact that the law prescribed that the estates of freedmen and freedwomen
who died intestate should belong to their patrons and to the children of
the latter, the ancient authority determined that the intention of the
law was that their grandchildren shall also belong to them, since it
directed that those agnates on whom it bestowed the estate should also
be guardians; because, generally speaking, where the benefit of the
succession is, there also the burden of guardianship should be placed.
We say generally speaking, because where a slave who has not reached
puberty is manumitted by a woman, she herself is entitled to the estate
although some one else will be appointed guardian.

TITLE XVIII. CONCERNING THE LEGAL GUARDIANSHIP OF ASCENDANTS.

There is another guardianship allowed which follows the example of that
of patrons, and this also is called legal; for where anyone

emancipates a son or a daughter, a grandson or a granddaughter by a son,
and so on through other degrees, so long as the party has not reached
puberty, he will be their legal guardian.

TITLE XIX. CONCERNING FIDUCIARY GUARDIANSHIP.

There is another kind of guardianship which is called fiduciary. For
where an ascendant emancipates a son or a daughter, a grandson or a
granddaughter, and so on, in succession, before they have reached the
age of puberty, he acquires a legal guardianship over them; and where,
at his death, he leaves children of the male sex, they become the
fiduciary guardians of their sons, of their brother, their sister, or
their relatives. But when a legal guardian dies, his children become
legal guardians, for the son of the defunct, if he has not been
emancipated by his father while the latter was still living, would have
become his own master after his father's death and would not have come
under the control of his brothers, and for this reason not under their
guardianship; while the freedman, if he had remained a slave, would have
sustained the same relation to the children of his master after the
death of the latter.

Persons entitled to exercise the office of guardian must be of full age,
a rule which one of Our Constitutions has directed to be generally
observed in the case of all guardianships and curatorships.

TITLE XX.

CONCERNING THE ATILIAN GUARDIAN, AND THE ONE APPOINTED UNDER THE LEX
JULIA ET TITIA.

Where no guardian at all had been appointed for a person it was
customary for one to be given him in the City of Rome by the Urban
Prætor and the majority of the Tribunes of the people under the *Lex
Atilia;* and in the provinces the appointment was made by the Governors,
in compliance with the *Lex Julia et Titia*.

\(1) But where a guardian had been appointed by will under some
condition or to act upon a certain day, as long as the condition was not
fulfilled or the day had not arrived, another guardian could be
appointed under these laws. Moreover, if the appointment had been made
without qualification, as long as there was no heir under the will, by
the same laws application was required to be made for another guardian
to act during that time, and he ceased to be a guardian if the condition
was complied with, or the day arrived, or an heir appeared.

\(2) Moreover, a guardian was usually applied for under the same laws
when the existing guardian had been captured by the enemy; and he ceased
to hold his office if the former returned from captivity, for having
returned he recovered the guardianship by the law of *postliminium*.

\(3) Guardians, however, are no longer appointed for minors under those
laws, since, in the first place, the Consuls, and afterwards the
Prætors, began to appoint guardians for minors of both sexes after
examination, in accordance with the Constitutions; for by the aforesaid
laws no provision was made for exacting bonds from guardians to preserve
the property of their wards, or for requiring them to properly
administer their guardianship.

\(4) The practice now prevails at Rome for the Prefect of the City, or
the Prætor, as far as he has jurisdiction, to appoint guardians; and in
the provinces the Governors do this after investigation, or the
magistrates do so by order of the Governors, where the property of the
minor is not of great value.

\(5) But We, by means of one of Our Constitutions, having removed the
uncertainties of men on questions of this description, and having caused
the order of the Governors to be no longer expected, have determined
that if the property of a minor or an adult is of the value of five
hundred *solidi *the Defenders of the City --- together with the most
reverend Bishop of the same, or in the presence of other public
officials or magistrates, or of the judge of the City of Alexandria ---
shall create guardians or curators, lawful security having been given
according to the provisions of the said Constitution, that is to say, at
the risk of those who accept it.

\(6) That persons not arrived at puberty should be under guardianship is
conformable to natural law, so that he who has not arrived at full age
may be directed by the guardianship of another.

\(7) For this reason, as the guardians of male and female wards transact
their business, they must render an account to them in an action of
guardianship after they have arrived at puberty.

TITLE XXI. CONCERNING THE SANCTION OF GUARDIANS.

The sanction of a guardian in some instances is requisite for wards and
in some instances it is not. For example, when a ward makes *& *contract
for something to be given him, the guardian's consent is not necessary,
but when wards promise something to others it is necessary; for it has
been decided that they have power to improve then condition even without
the authority of their guardians, but that they cannot make it worse
unless their guardians consent for them to do so. Wherefore, under
circumstances in which mutual obligations arise for instance, in
purchases, sales, letting and hiring, commissions, deposits, if the
authority of the guardian is not interposed, those persons who enter
into contracts with wards shall be liable; but, on the other hand, the
wards shall not be responsible.

\(1) Nor can they enter upon an estate or demand possession or property,
or accept an inheritance given in trust for their benefit, in any other
way than with the sanction of their guardian, even though it be
profitable, and no loss can arise therefrom.

\(2) The guardian should also, at once, and while the transaction is
pending, give his approval, if he thinks that it will be a benefit to
the ward; but if he does this afterwards or sanctions it by a letter,
his act is void.

\(3) When an action-at-law is to be conducted between guardian and ward
--- for the reason that the guardian cannot give his sanction to anything
relating to his own affairs --- a curator is appointed in his place (not a
Prætorian guardian as was formerly the practice), and the case is
carried on by the former who ceases to be curator when it is terminated.

TITLE XXII. IN WHAT WAYS A GUARDIANSHIP Is TERMINATED.

Male and female wards are released from guardianship as soon as they
reach puberty. The ancients were disposed to fix the age of puberty, as
far as males were concerned, not only by their years but by their
corporeal development. Our Majesty, however, has considered it proper
and worthy of the purity of the age that what seemed to be immodest to
the ancients in the case of females, that is the inspection of the
condition of their bodies, should also be extended to males; and,
therefore, by the promulgation of ah Imperial Constitution, We have
decreed that puberty in males shall begin immediately after the
completion of the fourteenth year, leaving without alteration the
excellent rule of antiquity respecting females, namely, that they should
be considered marriageable after the completion of their twelfth year.

\(1) Guardianship is also ended where persons who have not yet reached
puberty are either arrogated or banished; and the same rule applies
where a ward is reduced to slavery or is captured by the enemy.

\(2) Moreover, if a guardian is appointed by will to hold office until a
certain condition has been complied with, it also happens that when the
condition has been fulfilled he ceases to be a guardian.

\(3) In like manner guardianship is terminated by the death of either
the guardian or the ward.

\(4) Again, every guardianship is also determined by any impairment of
civil rights through which either the liberty or the citizenship of the
guardian is lost. By the least forfeiture of civil rights by a guardian,
for example, if he gives himself in adoption, only the legal
guardianship terminates, but other kinds do not. The loss of civil
rights, however, by either male or female wards, even though it be of
the least important class, terminates all kinds of guardianships.

\(5) Moreover, guardians appointed by will for a certain period
surrender their guardianship when it terminates.

\(6) Those, also, cease to be guardians who are removed from office
either because they are suspected, or excuse themselves for some just
cause and lay down the burden of guardianship, as We shall explain
hereafter.

TITLE XXIII. CONCERNING CURATORS.

Males who have attained puberty and women who are nubile receive
curators until the completion of their twenty-fifth year, for even
though they have reached puberty they are still of such an age that they
are not capable of transacting their own affairs.^1^

\(1) Curators are appointed by the same magistrates as guardians, but a
curator is not appointed by will, but after his appointment he is
confirmed by a decree of the Prætor, or Governor.

\(2) Minors are not required to accept curators if they are unwilling,
except in lawsuits; for a curator may also be appointed for a specific
purpose.

\(3) Insane persons, likewise, and spendthrifts, even though they may be
over twenty-five years of age, are nevertheless under the curatorship of
their relatives in the male line, according to a law of the Twelve
Tables; but it is the practice for the Prefect of the City or the Prætor
at Rome, and in the provinces for the Governors, to appoint curators for
them after investigation.

\(4) Curators must also be appointed for feeble-minded persons, those
who are deaf and dumb, and those who are suffering from chronic disease,
because they are not able to attend to their own affairs.

\(5) Again, curators are sometimes appointed for wards; for instance
where the legitimate guardian is not a suitable person, because a
guardian cannot be appointed for a person who already has one.

^1^ A certain amount of *opprobrium*, under the Roman law, attached to a
minor for whom a curator was appointed, as it was considered a reproach
that a freeman who had passed the age of puberty should not be permitted
to dispose of his personal property if he desired to do so. A curator
was usually appointed for a youth over fourteen, although for special
purposes, or as an aid to the guardian, one was sometimes designated for
a person under that age. The consent of the latter was absolutely
necessary, except where it was clear that he was not competent to manage
his affairs, or that he was squandering his estate. Before this could be
done, however, the next of kin were required to apply to the Prætor for
an order depriving the minor of the control of his property, and praying
for the appointment of a curator. Similar proceedings were instituted in
the case of lunatics; and, when necessary, were even employed where the
party in question had attained his majority.

These regulations date back to the Twelve Tables. The spendthrift was by
the Civil Law held to be *quasi furiosus*, that is legally, though not
actually insane, and, so far as the management of his estate was
concerned, classed as a madman. Curators could also be appointed to take
charge of the property of absent persons when their residences or
whereabouts were unknown. The curator differed from the guardian in that
his first, and most important duty was the care of the property, while
the guardian was principally responsible for the person of the minor.

Under the law of Scotland, as in general at Civil Law, curators can be
appointed after the party has passed the age of puberty, as otherwise
the appointment would be void. A father may select the curator or the
minor himself may do so, subject to confirmation by a court of competent
jurisdiction. When the latter avails himself of this privilege, it is
customary to leave him in the house of a disinterested person where all
his friends may have undisturbed access to him, so that, in making his
choice, no improper influence may be exerted in behalf of any certain
individual. Curators cannot, like guardians, act independently of the

Moreover, where a guardian appointed by a will, or by a Prætor or a
Governor is hot a proper person for the office, although he may not be
administering it fraudulently, it is customary for a curator to be
associated with him, and curators are also ordinarily appointed instead
of guardians who are temporarily, and not permanently released from
their guardianship.

\(6) Where a guardian is hindered by bad health or some other pressing
necessity from transacting the business of the ward, and the latter is
either absent or an infant, the Prætor, or the Governor of the province
may by an order appoint anyone whom the said guardian desires to act for
the latter, but at his risk.

TITLE XXIV.

CONCERNING THE GIVING OF SECURITY BY GUARDIANS AND CURATORS.

In order that the property of male and female wards and of other persons
under curatorship may not be wasted or diminished by their guardians or
curators, the Prætor takes care that guardians and curators shall
furnish proper security for this purpose. This rule does not apply to
every case, however, for testamentary guardians are not compelled to
give security, for the reason that their good faith and diligence have
been vouched for by the testator himself; nor are guardians or curators
appointed after investigation burdened with providing sureties because
proper persons are chosen.

minor, and therefore the concurrence of the latter in every transaction
is necessary. Where a minor has no curator, he is authorized by law to
act for himself. The office of curator, as well as that of guardian, is
gratuitous, and no compensation for services can be collected, even if
any should be agreed upon between the parties. (More, Lectures on the
Law of Scotland, Vol. I, III, 2.)

At Common Law, the office of curator is included in that of guardian
which is ordinarily the case in this country, although in some States of
the Union provision is made by statute for the separate appointment of
curators. The Codes of continental Europe vary greatly in their adoption
and application of the principles of Roman jurisprudence with reference
to this subject. In France, a curator is appointed by the family council
to assist the guardian in making up his account. (*Cod. Civ*., Art.
480.) Spanish legislation vests in a guardian either care of the person
and property of a ward, or both. *(Cod. Civ. de España*, Art. 199.) The
legal supervision of minors in Portugal is committed to guardians,
*protutors*, curators, and family councils. *(Civ. Cod. Portuguêz*, Art.
187.) The Italian Code allows the appointment of a special curator for
the management of property alone. (Cod. *Civ*., Art. 247.) The law of
Sweden makes no provision for the office of curator; all the duties of
the latter being discharged by the guardian. *(Sveriges Lag., Kap*.
XXIII.) Austria recognizes the ordinary distinction between guardians
and curators, and authorizes the appointment of either. *(Allgemeines
Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch*, Arts. 187, 188.) In Germany, the guardian has
charge of both the person and property of the ward. *(Burgerliches
Gesetzbuch*, Secs. 1800, 1802, 1809.) Curators, as such, do not exist
under the law of Switzerland, guardians having full control of the
property of minors. *(Schweizerliches Zivilgesetzbuch*, Art. 367.) The
law of Louisiana practically adopted the Roman doctrine of curatorship
in its entirety. (Civil Cod., Arts. 357, 418.) In Japan curators may be
appointed, but their functions are usually exercised by guardians. Only
one of either can act as such. (Civ. Cod., Chap. VI, Arts. 906, 909.) ---
ED.

\(1) Still, where two or more are appointed by will or after
investigation, one of them may offer sureties for the indemnification of
the ward or minor, and have the preference over his fellow-guardian or
fellow-curator, to such an extent that he may administer the trust
alone; or so that his fellow guardian, by offering equal security, may
have the preference over him, and he himself alone administer the trust.
Therefore, he cannot himself require security from his fellow-guardian
or fellow-curator, but he should make the offer, so as to give his
fellow guardian the choice of either taking security or giving it.
Where, however, neither of them offer security, and it has been stated
by the testator which one shall act, the one designated must do so: but
if this was not done, he whom the majority selects must act in
compliance with the Edict of the Prætor. But where the guardians
themselves disagree concerning the choice of the one or more who are to
act, the Prætor should exercise his authority.

This rule also applies where several persons are appointed after
investigation; that is to say, the majority can choose by whom the
administration shall be conducted.

\(2) It should further be noted that not only are guardians and curators
held accountable for their administration to their wards, to minors, and
to other persons, but also that a subsidiary action lies against those
who accept security, and provides the former with a final safeguard.
This subsidiary action is permitted against those who have either
entirely neglected to take security from guardians or curators, or have
accepted such as is not sufficient. This action, in accordance with the
opinions of jurists as well as under the Imperial Constitutions, can
also be brought against the heirs of those who are responsible.

\(3) In these Constitutions it is also set forth that where guardians or
curators do not give security they may be forced to do so by pledges
being required of them.

\(4) But neither the Prefect of the City, nor the Prætor, nor the
Governor of a province, nor anyone else who has the right to appoint
guardians is liable to the aforesaid action, but only those who are
accustomed to demand security.

TITLE XXV.

CONCERNING THE REASONS FOR EXCUSING GUARDIANS OR CURATORS.

Guardians or curators may be excused for various reasons, but most
frequently on account of their children, whether they are under their
authority or are emancipated; for where any resident of Rome has three
children living, or a resident of Italy four, or a person living in the
provinces, five, he can be excused from guardianship or curator-ship,
just as he can from other employments; for it has been decided that
guardianship and curatorship are public employments. Adopted children
are not considered, although children given in adoption are reckoned in
favor of their own father. Grandchildren, likewise, the

issue of a son, are an advantage in this respect, as they take their
father's place, but this does not apply to those by a daughter; and it
is only living children who are available as an excuse from the charge
of guardianship or curatorship; as those who are dead are not reckoned.
The question also has arisen as to whether those should not be included
who have been lost in war; and it has been determined that those only
shall be reckoned who have perished in actual battle, for such as have
died for their country are deemed to live forever on account of their
glory.

\(1) The Divine Marcus published in his semi-annual volumes of rescripts
that an official belonging to the Treasury could be excused from
guardianship or curatorship as long as he remained in office.

\(2) Those who are absent on business for the State may also be excused
from guardianship or curatorship. Moreover, if they have served as
guardians or curators, and subsequently depart on business for the
State, they are excused as long as they are absent for that reason, and,
in the meantime, a curator may be appointed in their stead. When they
return, however, they again take up the burden of guardianship; and as
Papinian stated in the Fifth Book of his Opinions, they are not even
released from responsibility for a year, although they are entitled to
this term when appointed to new guardianships.

\(3) Those also who have any other public office may be excused as the
Divine Marcus declared in a rescript, but after they have once assumed a
guardianship they cannot abandon it.

\(4) Moreover, no guardian or curator can be excused on account of a
lawsuit which he may have with his ward or any minor in his charge,
unless the litigation has arisen with reference to the entire property
or inheritance.

\(5) The burden of three guardianships or curatorships, where they have
not been sought for, affords an excuse for exemption so long as they are
being administered; in case the guardianship or curator-ship of several
wards, or of their property, shall be reckoned as only one, just as
those of brothers, for example.

\(6) Both the Divine Brothers and the Divine Marcus himself declared by
Rescripts that a person could be excused on the ground of poverty, if
anyone could show that he was unequal to the burden imposed upon him.

\(7) An excuse also is valid on account of bad health, by reason of
which a man is unable to transact his own business.

\(8) The Divine Pius stated in a Rescript that anyone unable to read
should be excused, although persons lacking knowledge of letters can
transact business.

\(9) Again, where a father on account of enmity has appointed anyone a
guardian by his will, this also furnishes a ground for exemption; just
as, on the other hand, those parties are not excused who have promised
their father that they will assume the guardianship of minors.

\(10) The Divine Brothers aforesaid published a Rescript stating that
the excuse of a man who relies solely upon the fact that he was unknown
to the father of the minors is not to be entertained.

\(11) Where anyone has cherished enmity against the father of wards or
minors, and it was mortal and no reconciliation has taken place, it is
customary to excuse the party from guardianship or curator-ship.

\(12) Also, if anyone has had his condition disputed by the father of
the minors, he may be excused from guardianship.

\(13) A person over seventy years of age can likewise be excused from
guardianship or curatorship. Also, in former times, those who were less
than twenty-five years of age were ordinarily excused; and by one of Our
Constitutions they are forbidden to claim either guardianship or
curatorship, and for this reason there is no necessity for an excuse. It
is also provided by the same Constitution that neither a ward nor minor
shall be called upon to assume a legal guardianship; for it is contrary
to law for those who are known to require assistance in the transaction
of their own business and who are governed by others, to be invested
with the guardianship or curatorship of third persons.

\(14) This must also be observed in the case of a soldier who, even if
he is willing, cannot be permitted to exercise the office of guardian.

\(15) Moreover, grammarians, rhetoricians, and physicians of Rome, and
others who in their own country practice these professions and who are
included in the number of those legally authorized, are also exempt from
guardianship or curatorship.

\(16) He who desires to be excused, and has several excuses but fails to
establish some of them, is not forbidden from profiting by the others
within the designated time. When parties desire to be excused they do
not take an appeal, but whatever kind of guardians they may be --- that is
to say, in whatever manner they have been appointed --- they must offer
their excuses within fifty consecutive days from the time they learn of
their appointment, if they are within the hundredth mile-stone from the
place where it was made; but if they reside beyond the hundredth
mile-stone, they may do this after making a calculation of twenty miles
a day and thirty days in addition; but, nevertheless, as Scævola has
stated, the reckoning should be made so that there may not be less than
fifty days in all.

\(17) When a guardian is appointed, it is understood that he is
appointed for the entire estate.

\(18) Any person who has administered the guardianship of another cannot
be compelled to be the curator of the same person if he is not willing;
and this rule applies to such an extent that although a father who
appointed a testamentary guardian added that he appointed the same party
curator, the Divine Severus and Antoninus stated in a Rescript that he
could not be forced to assume the curatorship if unwilling to do so.

\(19) They also stated in another Rescript that a husband who has been
appointed the curator of his wife may be excused, even though he may
have interfered in her affairs.

\(20) Where anyone has been excused from assuming guardianship by means
of false statements, he is not released from the burden of the said
guardianship.

TITLE **XXVI. **CONCERNING SUSPECTED GUARDIANS OR CURATORS.

It should be noted that the offence of suspicion is derived from a Law
of the Twelve Tables.

\(1) The power of removing suspected guardians is at Rome conferred upon
the Prætor, and in the provinces upon the Governors of the same and upon
the deputy of the Proconsul.

\(2) We have shown who has jurisdiction over a suspected person; let us
now see who can be suspected. And, indeed, all guardians can be, whether
they are testamentary guardians or those of another description; and
therefore a guardian may be accused even though he be appointed under
the law. But what if he be a patron? The same rule will still apply, so
long as we remember that the reputation of the patron must be spared,
even though he be removed as a suspected person.

\(3) We must next examine who can accuse suspected guardians, and it is
to be noted that an action of this kind is, to a certain extent, a
public one, that is to say open to all: and, indeed, by a Rescript of
the Divine Severus and Antoninus even women are permitted to bring such
an action, but only such as are actuated by the bond of affection can do
so; as, for example, a mother. A nurse and a grandmother can also
institute it, and a sister as well; and, moreover, if there is any woman
whose affectionate inclination is perceived by the Prætor, and who does
not exceed the modesty of her sex but is induced by her affections not
to countenance injury to the minors, he can authorize her to make the
accusation.

\(4) Those who are under the age of puberty cannot accuse their
guardians as being suspected persons, but those who have reached puberty
can, with the advice of their relatives, accuse their curators as being
suspected; and this rule the Divine Severus and Antoninus promulgated in
a Rescript.

\(5) He who does not administer the guardianship with fidelity even
though he be solvent, is a suspected person, as Julianus also stated.
Julian likewise held that a guardian can be removed as being suspected,
before he has begun to administer the guardianship, and a Constitution
has been enacted in agreement with this regulation.

\(6) A person who has been removed on account of being suspected becomes
infamous where this is done by reason of fraud, but this is not the case
if he is removed on account of negligence.

\(7) If anyone is accused on account of being suspected, the
administration of his trust is forbidden him until the investigation has
been terminated, in accordance with the doctrine of Papinian.

\(8) Where the investigation of a suspected person has been begun and he
afterwards dies, whether he be either guardian or curator, the
investigation is concluded.

\(9) Where a guardian does not appear in order that necessaries may be
adjudged to his ward, it is provided by a Rescript of the Divine Severus
and Antoninus that the ward shall be placed in possession of his
property, and that any article which might be damaged by delay shall be
ordered to be sold by the curator appointed under such circumstances.
Therefore, a curator who does not furnish necessaries may be removed as
being suspected.

\(10) But where the guardian appears, and denies that necessaries can be
furnished on account of the poverty of the estate, and this allegation
is false; it has been decreed that he shall be delivered to the Prefect
of the City to be punished, just as a party is delivered up who has
obtained the administration of a guardianship by the payment of money.

\(11) Again, when it is established that a freedman has fraudulently
administered the guardianship of the children or grandchildren of his
patron, he shall be delivered up to the Prefect of the City to be
punished.

\(12) In conclusion, it must be noted that those who fraudulently
administer a guardianship or curatorship shall be removed from office
even though they offer security; because the tender of security does not
change the malevolent intention of the guardian, but affords him the
opportunity to damage the estate for a longer period.

\(13) We, in fact, consider a man suspected whose morals are such that
he is liable to suspicion, and in fact a guardian or a curator, even if
he is poor, should not be removed as suspected if he is also faithful
and diligent.
