THE OPINIONS OF JULIUS PAULUS.

BOOK V.

TITLE I. \
CONCERNING CASES INVOLVING FREEDOM.

​(1) Where persons, on account of extreme necessity or through want of
food, sell their children, they do not prejudice their rights of
freedom, for a freeman can not be valued at any price. Nor can children
be pledged or hypothecated by their parents; for which reason any
creditor who knowingly permits this to be done shall be deported. The
services of children can however be hired.

​(2) Manumission, no matter in what way it may take place, does not
prejudice true and original free birth.

​(3) The division of free born persons made by public authority among
slaves belonging to the Treasury, cannot prejudice the right of free
birth.

​(4) Anyone who, through intimidation and the effect of terror of any
kind, falsely declares himself to be a slave before the tribunal of the
governor, does not prejudice his condition, if he subsequently defends
himself.

​(5) Where anyone undertakes to defend a slave, and after proceedings
have been instituted to declare him free abandons the case, it has been
decided that it can be entirely transferred to another defender, and the
first one be judicially punished for his act in betraying the cause of
freedom; for where a case involving a man's condition has been
undertaken, it cannot be relinquished except under urgent necessity.

TITLE II. \
CONCERNING USUCAPTION.

​(1) We acquire possession by means of both the mind and the body, by
our minds through our own exertions, by our bodies through our own
exertions or those of others; we cannot, however, obtain possession by
mere intention, but we can retain it in this manner, as happens in the
case of winter and summer pastures.

​(2) Nothing can be acquired for us by free persons who are under our
control, but it has been decided that, for the sake of convenience,
possession can be acquired for us by an agent. When the principal is
absent, anything which is purchased is not acquired for him, unless he
subsequently ratifies the act.

​(3) Prescription of long time is established where the parties are
present, by continuous occupation for the term of ten years; where the
parties are absent, by continuous occupation for twenty years.

​(4) Prescription for ten or twenty years also runs against public
property, in favor of a person who had lawful possession in the
beginning, and which was not in the meantime interrupted. The action of
public property for damages is granted against those who have neglected
to attend to matters of this kind.

​(5) If, after a question as to the ownership of property has arisen, it
in the meantime passes to a new owner by purchase, and he is not
disturbed in its possession for twenty years, he cannot be deprived of
it.

TITLE III. \
CONCERNING ACTS COMMITTED BY A CROWD.

​(1) A claim for double damages, if the matter is a pecuniary one, can
be brought against those who have either caused injury to anyone, or
have been responsible for so doing, as members of a crowd or during the
course of a sedition. If, however, any person has been injured by loss
of life or limb on this account, extraordinary punishment may be
inflicted.^1^

​(2) Where any property obtained from a fire, the ruin of a building,
shipwreck, or the plunder of a vessel, has been stolen or concealed, the
party who concealed, stole, or took it by violence, can, within a year,
be sued for fourfold damages, and, after the lapse of a year, for simple
damages.

​(3) Those who pillage, break into, or rob the residences or buildings
of others, shall be punished with death if the act was committed by an
assembled crowd armed with weapons. By the term "weapons" is understood
everything by which the safety of a man can be endangered.

​(4) Those who harbor the aggressors are punished with the same penalty
as the robbers themselves, for the desires of the parties who are not
active participants do not differ from that of those who steal, or
conceal the property.

​(5) Thieves and robbers of baths are generally sentenced to the mines
or to labor on the public works; sometimes, however, the sentence of the
judge is mitigated on account of the great number of the guilty parties.

​(6) Incendiaries who intentionally set fire to property are punished
with death. If, however, the fire was caused by the negligence of the
occupants of a house, it has been decided that a loss of this kind must
be made good by the owner of the property.

^1^ *Cognitio extraordinaria*, or extraordinary procedure, consisted in
the union of the duties of the judges of law and fact in a single
official, usually a magistrate of the highest rank. Much was left to his
discretion, and his rulings were often arbitrary and noted for their
severity in criminal cases. This violation of the ancient principle
which had prevailed in Roman judicature from the time of the Republic,
was largely due to the disinclination of responsible citizens to serve
as *judices* and *recuperatores*, judges of fact, who to a certain
extent, exercised the functions of modern jurymen in the courts of the
Empire. Although the practice was not unusual when circumstances
appeared to demand it, it was first legally authorized by Diocletian in
294, who conferred absolute and sole jurisdiction on the governors of
provinces in the hearing of causes brought before their tribunals. This
privilege, manifestly susceptible of great abuse by unscrupulous
individuals, was afterwards, by a series of enactments, conferred upon
the other prominent members of the Roman magistracy. — ED.

TITLE IV. \
CONCERNING INJURIES.

​(1) We suffer injuries either in our bodies or outside of them; in our
bodies, by blows and through debauchery; outside of our bodies by
insults, and infamous libels, the effect of which is estimated by the
position of both the party who suffers it and the party who inflicts it.

​(2) An insane person, as well as an infant, are legally incapable of
malicious intent and the power to insult, and therefore the action for
injuries cannot be brought against them.

​(3) If an injury is committed against our children who are under our
control, or against our wives, it is to our interest to see that
punishment is inflicted; therefore an action can be brought by us,
provided the party who committed the act can be shown to have done so to
our injury.

​(4) A corporeal injury is inflicted when anyone is struck; it is
different where adultery is committed, or an accusation is brought for
the offence, which is punished judicially, as the forcible violation of
modesty is punished capitally.

​(5) Those who solicit married women, and those also who interfere with
marriages, even if they are unable to consummate their crimes, are
extraordinarily punished, on account of their intention to perpetrate
acts of injurious debauchery.

​(6) The action for injury is based either upon law or custom, or upon
both. Punishment is provided by the Law of the Twelve Tables for
libellous poems, broken limbs, and fractured bones.

​(7) So far as custom is concerned, this takes place whenever the damage
caused by an act is estimated by the judge according to its nature, and
is punished by the infliction of a suitable penalty.

​(8) The action for injury arising from both law and custom is
established under the *Lex Cornelia*, whenever anyone is beaten, or his
his house is entered, not by those who are ordinarily called
*derectarii*, and who are extraordinarily punished; so that the design
of the thief who enters a house — as in the case of the intentional
commission of fraud — is punished by the penalty of exile, or sentenced
to the mines or to the public works.

​(9) Anyone who is civilly convicted of having caused an injury is
required to pay the damage and becomes infamous.

​(10) An atrocious injury depends either upon the place, time, or
person; upon the place, whenever it is committed in public; upon the
time, when it is committed by day; upon the person, when it is committed
against a senator, a Roman knight, a decurion, or any other person high
in authority; and whether a plebeian, or a person of inferior rank
commits the injury against a senator, a Roman knight, or a decurion, or
whether a plebeian commits the injury against a magistrate, an ædile, or
a judge, or against all of them.

​(11) Anyone who brings the action for injury for the purpose of causing
annoyance is extraordinarily punished; for it has been decided that all
calumniators shall be punished by exile, by relegation to an island, or
by the loss of their rank.

​(12) Persons cannot bring an accusation of injury unless they are
present, for the crime which is punished by the action of calumny cannot
be prosecuted by others.

​(13) An injury is committed against good morals, when anyone smears or
bedaubs anyone with manure, filth, or mud; or defiles pipes, reservoirs,
or anything else to the public injury. Persons of this kind are
generally severely punished.

​(14) Anyone who debauches a boy under the age of seventeen, or commits
any other outrage on him, whether he is abducted by him or by a corrupt
companion; or who solicits a woman or a girl, or does anything for the
purpose of corrupting their chastity, or offers his house for that
purpose, or gives them any reward in order to persuade them, and the
crime is consummated, shall be punished with death; if it is not
consummated, he shall be deported to an island, and his profligate
accomplices shall suffer the extreme penalty.

​(15) Anyone who composes a libellous song to the injury of another, or
any poem by which the party may be recognized, shall be deported to an
island by the authority of a Decree of the Senate; for it is in the
interest of public order that the reputation of everyone should be
protected from the infamy caused by vile poetry. He not only composes
poetry of this kind who writes satires and epigrams, but also he who
composes anything else of any other description.

Nothing, however, is provided with reference to a speech composed for
the purpose of lawfully prosecuting anyone, or for the arraignment of
the opposite party in court, as the person of our adversary should in
every way be attacked, but in doing so a certain moderation and judgment
should be observed for a man's reputation may also be injured in this
way.

​(16) A *Psalterium*, as a song is commonly called which is composed and
publicly sung for the purpose of disgracing another, causes the
infliction of extraordinary punishment upon those who sing, as well as
upon those who compose it; and the punishment is the more severe if the
dignity of the person should be protected from injury of this kind.

​(17) Persons who purchase infamous libels for the purpose of
distributing them to insult others are punished extraordinarily, even to
the extent of relegation to an island.

​(18) A judge should not be abused by appellants, otherwise they are
branded with infamy.

​(19) Curses and abuse publicly uttered call for the punishment of
injury, and when this is inflicted the condemned party becomes infamous.

​(20) Not only he who uttered the curses and abuse, becomes infamous if
convicted, but also he by whose aid and counsel the act is alleged to
have been committed.

​(21) Abuse is said to be against good morals when anyone uses obscene
language, or exposes the lower part of his person in the presence of a
woman; and an act of this kind in consideration of good morals and on
account of public virtue, demands punishment of extraordinary severity.

​(22) Where a slave has perpetrated an injury or insult, which is
atrocious, he shall be condemned to the mines; if, however, it is not
serious, after having been scourged, he shall be restored to his master
under the penalty of being confined in chains for a time.

TITLE V. \
CONCERNING THE EFFECT OF DECISIONS AND THE TERMINATION OF ACTIONS AT
LAW.

​(1) Actions-at-law are decided by those who have the authority and
power to do so, or by the authority of persons selected by the parties
themselves, and likewise by municipal magistrates up to the amount for
which they have the legal right to render judgment; and by those who
have been appointed by the Emperor out of the regular order.

Moreover, a judge appointed in a case involving a joint promise does not
render a final decision, but if a penalty has been promised by the
defendants, and the case is afterwards brought into court, the penalty
can be collected under the stipulation.

​(2) Debtors who have confessed their liability are considered as having
judgment rendered against them, and therefore the time for payment is
reckoned from the day of the confession.

​(3) Anyone can acknowledge his liability in court, not only verbally
but in writing, or in any other way whatsoever. He cannot be defeated,
however, unless by written evidence, or by that of witnesses.

​(4) The pledges of those who have acknowledged their indebtedness can
be seized and sold.

​(5) A defendant cannot revoke his confession a second time.

​(6) A decision rendered in the absence of the other party does not
obtain the force of *res judicata*.

​(7) When a party is summoned by three letters or proclamations, or by
one served for all, or by three public notices, and he does not appear
before the court which notified him, or by whose letters or proclamation
he was summoned, and a judgment is rendered against him as contumacious,
it obtains the authority of a final decision for an appeal can by no
means be taken from it.

(7a) An appeal cannot be taken from a judgment rendered against a person
for contumacy, nor can it be brought up a second time.

​(8) Formerly, a case which had been finally decided could not be
brought into court after a long silence, nor could it be revoked on that
account. A long term of silence, as in the case of long prescription,
runs for ten years, where the parties are present; and is computed at
twenty years, when they are absent.

​(9) No person who is absent can be condemned in a capital case, nor can
one who is absent either accuse or be accused by another.

​(10) Where the judge has been deceived by the introduction of forged
documents, the renewal of the case can be legally demanded, provided the
decision was pronounced before it was proved that the crime was
committed.

​(11) An error in calculation frequently takes place and therefore can
be reconsidered at any time, if the right is not extinguished by a
prolonged silence.

TITLE V. B. \
CONCERNING THE POSSESSION OF PROPERTY GRANTED BY THE AUTHORITY OF A
JUDGE.

​(1) Where creditors are placed in possession of the property of a minor
for whom no defence is made, they are required to furnish him support
until he reaches the age of puberty.

​(2) The property of a person who has been captured by the enemy cannot
be sold until he returns.

TITLE VI. \
CONCERNING INTERDICTS.

​(1) Interdicts were introduced for the purpose of retaining possession,
and by means of them we retain the possession which we already have. To
this class belong the interdicts *Uti Possidetis*, which has reference
to property attached to the soil, and *Utrubi*, which applies to movable
property. In the case of the first, the position of that party is
preferable who, at the time that the interdict was issued, had not
obtained possession from his adversary, either by force, clandestinely,
or by permission of the latter; and in the second, his position is
preferable who has obtained possession neither by violence, nor
clandestinely, nor by permission, and has retained it for the greater
part of the past year.

​(2) An interdict, like an action, will lie to prevent anyone from
interfering with the public highway, the care of which devolves upon the
officials having charge of highways.

No one is exempt from repairing highways, still, if a person, while
working, obstructs one so that those who pass to and fro are hindered,
after the obstruction has been demolished he shall be condemned.

​(3) Not only is an interdict available when the owner of property
deprives anyone of possession, but also where his family does so; and
only two slaves are sufficient to constitute a family.

​(4) A person is forcibly ejected, not only where he is terrified
through the oppression of a multitude of persons, or intimidated by
clubs, darts, or other weapons, but also if he relinquishes possession
through apprehension of violence, provided his adversary has entered on
the property.

​(5) Proceedings cannot be instituted under this interdict by a party
who has been forcibly ejected from a ship; but an equitable action for
the recovery of property, such as is granted as in the case of goods
taken by violence will lie. The same rule also applies where anyone is
deprived of a vehicle, or a horse, and if they are not removed, an
action for injury is granted.

​(6) He also is held to be forcibly ejected who is restrained by
violence, and terrified upon the highway, so that he cannot approach his
own land.

​(7) Anyone who has obtained possession from his adversary either by
violence, or clandestinely, or by his consent, can be ejected with
impunity.

​(8) Where possession of buildings has been obtained by violence, and
any property belonging to the same is burned, or any slaves found there
die; although this may have occurred without the malicious intent of the
party guilty of the violence, still, he who desired to obtain property
belonging to another will be condemned to pay the value of what was lost
or destroyed.

​(9) When water is taken from a stream forming the boundary between
neighbors it should first be divided; and force is forbidden to be
exerted against anyone who conducts water from those parts of the stream
from which it has been customary for each one of the parties to draw his
supply. A pecuniary fine is imposed upon anyone who unlawfully makes use
of water belonging to another. The regulation of this matter is part of
the duty of the governor.

​(10) When an interdict is issued, a certain right of action arises from
the fact that anyone who has possession with the consent of another must
restore the property; still, a civil action will lie to recover it, as
if it had been loaned for use, or especially on the ground that no one
should suffer injury on account of the favor which he has granted.

​(11) Anyone is considered to have possession by the consent of another,
not only where he has asked that it be granted to him by a letter, or in
any other way, but also where he has possession through no indication of
the consent of the owner, but merely through his sufferance.

​(12) The heir of the party who held possession with the consent of
another, and still retains it, is considered to hold possession
clandestinely, according to the better opinion; for he does not appear
to have made any request to that effect, therefore the owner has always
the right to claim his property, and there is no ground for an
interdict.

​(13) Where a tree overhangs the house of another, or the field of a
neighbor, so as to obstruct the light, the owner should be notified to
trim it; and if, after having been notified to do so, he refuses, the
overgrowth of branches may be cut by the neighbor, and this any owner of
land whosoever is not prevented from doing.

​(14) An interdict as well as an action authorized by the *Lex Favia*,
will lie against a party who places a freeman in chains, conceals him,
shuts him up, or gives any assistance to enable this to be done; and
proceedings under an interdict may also be instituted to compel the
party who detains him to produce him under the *Lex Favia*, so that he
also may be liable to a pecuniary penalty.

​(15) The Divine Pius forbade persons living harmoniously in marriage to
be separated by a father. He also forbade a freedman to be separated
from his patron, or a son or a daughter from their parents, unless a
question arose as to where one of the parties could live more
advantageously.

​(16) Where all the property which anyone has at present, or may acquire
in the future, is hypothecated, neither a concubine, nor a natural son,
nor a foster-child, nor any articles which he may have for daily use are
included; and therefore an interdict is not issued with reference to
them.

TITLE VII. \
CONCERNING VERBAL OBLIGATIONS.

​(1) Stipulations were introduced for the purpose of confirming
obligations which are contracted merely by a form of words; and they are
so called because by means of them the force of obligations is
strengthened, for the ancients used the term *stipulum* to denote firm.

​(2) Verbal obligations are contracted between present, but not between
absent persons. If, however, it should be stated in an instrument in
writing that anyone had made a promise, it is considered the same as if
an answer had been made to a preceding interrogation.

​(3) If a slave belonging to an usufructuary acquires anything by the
property of the latter, or by his own labor, it will belong to the
usufructuary; and, moreover, whatever he acquires from any other source,
or from the property of the owner, he acquires for the owner.

​(4) When, by the act of the promisor, property included in the
stipulation is destroyed, an action can be brought under the stipulation
just as if the said property was still in existence; and therefore the
promisor is punished by being compelled to pay its value, and especially
is this the case where the stipulation was entered into with any fraud
on his part.

TITLE VIII. \
CONCERNING NOVATIONS.

​(1) Not only can we ourselves create novations with reference to what
is due to us, but we can also do so through others by whom we can
stipulate, for instance, through a son under paternal control, or a
slave, by giving him orders, or by ratifying his act. It is settled that
our attorney can also make a novation by our order.^1^

^1^ Novation, in Roman jurisprudence, meant something more than the mere
extinction or renewal of an obligation, but, as the name implies, had
reference to any alteration whatever which either did, or did not,
increase the liability of the debtor. There were two kinds, the *novatio
privativa*, which operated as a renewal, and disposed of the prior
claim; and the *novatio cumulativa*, by means of which a second debt was
created, leaving the already existing one in full force. When a new
debtor, styled an *expromissor*, assumed the liability of the older one
and the latter was, in consequence, released by the creditor, the
proceeding was known as "delegation". Consent of the parties was
absolutely essential to effect delegation; an *expromissor* could,
however, agree to discharge the indebtedness without the knowledge or
consent of the debtor.

Novation could not be created by presumption, and unless it was
expressly stated that the former debt was cancelled by the new one, it
was held to be cumulative, or supplementary, which, properly speaking,
was not really a novation. In a transaction of this kind the *animus
novandi* must be manifest, as its validity was entirely dependent upon
the intention of the parties interested. — ED.

TITLE IX. \
CONCERNING STIPULATIONS.

​(1) Where an heir was appointed under a condition, and is charged with
the substitution of another, he can legally compel the party appointed
by him to provide by stipulation that he will not diminish the property
belonging to the estate by demanding prætorian possession; for, in this
instance, he is compelled to pay double the amount of the profits from
the day when the stipulation was entered into. The terms of this differ
from those of the former one in which inquiry was made whether the
property in question was worth more than a hundred sesterces, and
therefore a longer time was established.

​(2) The double profits are computed from the day when issue was joined
by the party who instituted proceedings, and security was given for
costs and damages. Both those who give and receive security and their
heirs, attorneys, agents, and sponsors, are included in the same
stipulation, as well as the other parties in whose name the promise is
made.

​(3) Whenever security is given in a stipulation for the payment of a
judgment and an action is not brought under it, this does not prevent
prosecution under the judgment.

​(4) If emancipated children who have been passed over, desire to meddle
with the estate of their father, and they remain with those who are
still under paternal control, and desire to have the estate of their
common father divided before demanding prætorian possession; they should
give security for placing all the property in a mass. If they cannot
furnish security, they should be immediately compelled to faithfully
bring all the property in confusion,^1^ with the exception of any
*peculium castrense* which may exist.

^1^ *Confusio*, or merger of obligations, caused them to be extinguished
by operation of law when the same person through force of circumstances,
came to occupy the position of debtor as well as creditor, and hence the
rights of both coincided. This might occur in the inheritance of an
estate, where either became the heir of the other, or when the creditor
succeeded to the surety, or *vice-versa*. Where the principal alone was
affected, the surety was at once released; but if the confusion had
reference to the person of the latter it is obvious that the obligation,
as far as the liability of the principal was concerned, was not
extinguished. — ED.

TITLE X. \
CONCERNING AUTHORITY FOR MAKING CONTRACTS.

​(1) One neighbor should give security to another to provide against
impending damage, and sponsors should be added with reference to the
damage which might take place.

​(2) For the sake of convenience, it should be observed with reference
to a party wall, that he whose interest it is to build it ought to do
so, but the other joint owner should be compelled to contribute his
share of the expense.

TITLE XI. \
CONCERNING DONATIONS.

​(1) Where articles, over and above the dowry, are presented by the
mother, in honor of the marriage, to her son-in-law in the presence of
her daughter, they are considered to have perfected the donation.

​(2) The proof that possession has, or has not been delivered, does not
consist so much in law, as in fact; and therefore if I actually have the
property in my hands it will be sufficient evidence.

​(3) If a father donates anything to his son under paternal control and
does not change his mind before he dies, the donation will vest at the
death of the father.

​(4) Where a donation of the same thing is made to two persons, he has
the preference to whom the article was delivered; nor does it make any
difference who received it last, or first, or whether certain persons
are excepted or not.

​(5) A donor who is unwilling, is not compelled to promise with
reference to the eviction of the property donated, nor is he rendered
liable on this account if he did promise; because the possessor of
property which benefits him is barred from bringing the action of
eviction by the reason of the law itself.

​(6) Any amount can be donated to a person who has rescued another from
robbers, or the enemy, provided the donation is not called a reward for
extraordinary exertion; because it has been decided that no limit can be
placed upon the preservation of safety.

TITLE XII. \
CONCERNING THE RIGHT OF THE TREASURY AND THE PEOPLE.

​(1) The property of one who kills himself on account of the commission
of some atrocious crime, is confiscated to the Treasury. If, however,
through weariness of life, or shame for indebtedness contracted, or
inability to endure suffering caused by disease, he commits this
offence, his property is not interfered with, but passes to his heirs by
the ordinary rules of succession.

​(2) He is deprived of an estate as being unworthy, who prevents anyone
from making a will who is connected with, or related to him, and to whom
he would succeed if he should die intestate; or intentionally interferes
with his rights.

​(3) Where a father or a master alleges that a will by which his son or
slave is appointed an heir, or is entitled to a legacy, is false, and he
does not prove his case, there is ground for confiscation by the
Treasury.

​(4) It is customary to come to the relief of a minor for the amount
that he has lost where he alleges that a will is forged and he does not
gain his case, and this is especially true where the action was brought
by the advice of a guardian or a curator.

​(5) A person is forbidden to hold any office connected with the
Treasury in the province in which he was born, in order that he may not
appear to favor or oppress his neighbor.

​(6) Whenever officials take possession of the property of others, or
publish it for sale, or place it under guard without authority of court,
the Imperial Steward can be applied to, the wrong redressed, and those
responsible for the act sent to the prætorian prefecture to be punished.

​(7) A right of action can not be donated to the Treasury to the injury
of private persons, nor, if donated, can it be accepted by it.

​(8) It is odious to appoint the Emperor an heir for the purpose of
litigation, for the power of causing annoyance should not be assumed by
Imperial Majesty.

​(9) No cause of action arises from a mere promise, and therefore the
property of one who boasts that he is going to make the Emperor his heir
cannot be confiscated by the Treasury.

​(10) It is the privilege of the Treasury to hold the first place among
all creditors.

​(11) Anyone who is sued by the Treasury should not be summoned by the
judge under a copy of any document, but under the original, so that the
terms of the contract can be shown. It is settled, however, that an
instrument intended to cause vexatious litigation cannot have the force
of a just claim in court.

​(12) The property of one who is alleged to have counterfeited money is
confiscated to the Treasury. If, however, slaves are said to have done
this without the knowledge of their master, they shall be put to death;
but their master shall not be deprived of any property, for the reason
that slaves cannot cause the condition of their master to become worse,
unless he happened to know what they were doing.

TITLE XIII. \
CONCERNING INFORMERS.

​(1) All persons are specially prohibited from accusing others, and
bringing pecuniary cases to the notice of the Treasury; nor does it make
any difference whether those who do this are males or females, slaves,
freeborn persons, or freedmen; or whether they denounce their own
relatives or strangers; for they, by all means, shall be punished.

​(2) Slaves belonging to the Treasury who give information and notice to
their owner are not considered to have denounced anyone.

Persons who have been suborned are compelled to betray the culprit, in
order to prevent a party who cannot denounce anyone himself from doing
it through another. Suborners are punished in the same way as informers.

​(3) Slaves who have been condemned, and confess the crimes of their
masters before or after they have been sentenced, shall under no
circumstances be heard; unless they accuse them of high treason.

TITLE XIV. \
CONCERNING THE INFLICTION OF TORTURE.

​(1) Torture is employed in the detection of crime, but a beginning
should not be made with its application; and, therefore, in the first
place, evidence should be resorted to, and if the party is liable to
suspicion, he shall be compelled by torture to reveal his accomplices
and crimes.

​(2) Where several culprits are implicated in the same offence, they
should be examined in such a way as to begin with the one who appears to
be more timid than the others, and of tender age.

TITLE XV. \
CONCERNING WITNESSES.

​(1) It has been decided that witnesses who are suspected of partiality,
and especially, such as the accuser produces from his own household, or
whose low station in life renders them of bad repute, should not be
interrogated; for in the case of witnesses, their social position, as
well as their dignity, should be considered.

​(2) Witnesses cannot be examined with reference to anyone related to
them by either marriage or blood.

​(3) Neither parents, children, patrons, nor freedmen should be admitted
to testify against one another, if they are unwilling to do so; for the
near relationship of persons generally destroys the truth of evidence.

​(4) Witnesses cannot be interrogated against documentary evidence
unless its genuineness has previously been alleged to be doubtful.

​(5) Witnesses who have testified falsely, or in different ways or have
betrayed either party in the case, are either sent into exile, relegated
to an island, or dismissed from the *curia*.

​(6) Torture is not applied in pecuniary matters, unless when an
investigation is made with reference to property belonging to an estate;
other things, however, are established by oath, or by the evidence of
witnesses.

TITLE XVI. \
CONCERNING THE TORTURE OF SLAVES.

​(1) The rule of equity plainly shows that a slave can be interrogated
with reference to his own acts, and against himself; for no obstacle
should be placed in the way of him who lends or deposits anything by a
slave without obtaining security.

​(2) A judge having jurisdiction of guardianship, as well as the
*Centumviri*, can apply torture to slaves belonging to an estate if they
cannot otherwise obtain information concerning the property of the
estate, or the honor of the family.

​(3) A slave belonging to one master cannot be tortured against the
person of another, unless this is done separately; and it is not
permitted if his owner is unwilling, unless the informer, who has an
interest in proving what he claims, is ready to pay the value of the
slave to the amount estimated by his owner, or to make good any
deterioration which he may be undergone by the slave.

​(4) No attention shall be paid to a slave who voluntarily makes any
confession with reference to his master, for where matters are in doubt,
it is not proper that the safety of masters should depend upon the
discretion of their slaves.

​(5) Slaves cannot be interrogated against their masters by governors or
public prosecutors, either in pecuniary or capital cases.

​(6) A slave owned in common cannot be tortured in a case involving the
life of either of his masters.

​(7) Where anyone purchases a slave in order to prevent his being
tortured to obtain evidence against him, the slave can be interrogated
after the purchase money has been returned.

​(8) A slave cannot be interrogated in a case involving the life of the
master by whom he was sold, and in whose service he was for some time,
through respect for his former master.

​(9) When a slave has been manumitted in order to avoid his being put to
the torture, this can still be done.

​(10) No faith should be placed in the evidence obtained by the torture
of a robber, whom someone has offered as having made a confession with
reference to himself; unless this is shown to have been done for the
purpose of concealing the guilty knowledge of the crime which he shared
with the defendant.

​(11) An accuser cannot bring an accusation by another, nor can one
accused person be defended by another; unless a patron accuses his
freedman of ingratitude, or a defence is made during the absence of the
party accused.

​(12) If a defendant is alleged to have been acquitted on account of
money paid to the judge, and this should be proved against him, he shall
be sentenced to the same penalty to which the defendant could have been
sentenced.

​(13) It should be determined by the nature of the crime which has been
committed, whether a person who has been convicted may, or may not, be
tortured.

​(14) Accusers should be compelled to notify defendants of what crimes
they are accused; for it is necessary that they should know for what
offences they will be required to answer.

TITLE XVII. \
CONCERNING ACQUITTALS.

​(1) An acquittal is the destruction, oblivion, or extinction of an
accusation.

​(2) After a public acquittal a defendant can again be prosecuted by his
informer within thirty days, but after that time this cannot be done.

​(3) Extreme punishments are crucifixion, burning alive, beheading; the
penalties for less serious offences are condemnation to the mines,
contests with gladiators, deportation; the mildest punishments are
relegation, exile, labor on the public works, confinement in chains.
Those who are sentenced to death must be executed within a year.

TITLE XVIII. \
CONCERNING CATTLE THIEVES.

​(1) Cattle thieves are those who drive away one horse or two mares, or
the same number of oxen, or ten sheep or goats, or five hogs. Anyone who
drives away an animal within the aforesaid number shall be sued for
double or quadruple its value, according to his rank, as a penalty for
theft; or, after having been beaten with rods, he shall be sentenced to
labor on the public works for a year; or, if he is a slave, he shall be
restored to his master to be placed in chains.

​(2) ....^1^

​(3) If anyone drives away cattle, the ownership of which is in
litigation, he shall be brought into court, and if convicted, shall be
sentenced to pay double or quadruple their value as a thief.

​(4) ....^1^

^1^ Original manuscript illegible.

TITLE XIX. \
CONCERNING SACRILEGE.

​(1) Persons who break into a temple at night for the purpose of robbery
and plunder, shall be thrown to wild beasts; where, however, during the
day they steal anything from a temple which can be easily carried off,
if they are of high rank, they shall be deported, if of inferior
station, they shall be sentenced to the mines.

TITLE XX. \
CONCERNING INCENDIARIES.

​(1) Any persons who cause fires in a town for the purpose of plunder
shall be punished with death.

​(2) Those who set fire to a house or country residence through enmity,
if they are of low rank, shall be sentenced to the mines or to labor on
the public works; those of higher rank shall be relegated to an island.

​(3) Where fires are accidental, or where, through the neglect of the
person who starts them, they are carried by the wind, and spread to the
fields of a neighbor, and growing grain, vines, olives, or fruit trees
are destroyed, the estimated damage which has been caused must be made
good.

​(4) If a slave started the fire, and his master is responsible, the
damage shall be made good through his surrender by way of reparation.

​(5) Those who maliciously set fire to growing crops of grain, or vines,
or olive trees, if of inferior station, shall be sentenced to the mines,
if of superior rank, shall be relegated to an island.

​(6) Those who cut down fruit trees at night are generally sentenced to
labor on the public works for a term of years, or, if they are of
superior rank, are either compelled to make good the damage, or are
expelled from their *curia*, or relegated.

TITLE XXI. \
CONCERNING SOOTHSAYERS AND ASTROLOGERS.

​(1) It has been decided that soothsayers who assume the characteristics
of divinity, shall be expelled from the city to prevent public morals
from being corrupted through human credulity entertaining faith in
anything of this kind, for there is no doubt that the popular mind is
disturbed by these things. Therefore, such persons, after having been
beaten with rods, are driven from the city; and if they continue to
practise their arts, they are either publicly placed in chains, or
deported to an island, or relegated.

​(2) Those who introduce new religious doctrines which are unknown to
use or reason, and by which the minds of men are influenced, if they are
of higher rank, shall be deported, if of inferior station, they shall be
punished with death.

​(3) Those who consult astrologers, male or female soothsayers, or
diviners, with reference to the life of the Emperor or the safety of the
State, shall be punished with death, together with the party who
answered their questions.

​(4) Every one should abstain not only from divination but also from the
books teaching that science. If slaves consult a soothsayer with
reference to the life of their master, they shall be subjected to
extreme punishment, that is to say, to crucifixion; and if those who are
consulted give any answer, they shall either be sentenced to the mines,
or deported to an island.

TITLE XXII. \
CONCERNING SEDITIOUS PERSONS.

​(1) The authors of sedition and tumult, or those who stir up the
people, shall, according to their rank, either be crucified, thrown to
wild beasts, or deported to an island.

​(2) Those who dig up, or plow out landmarks, or overturn trees used for
that purpose; if they are slaves, and commit the act voluntarily, shall
be sentenced to the mines; persons of inferior rank shall be sentenced
to labor on the public works; those of higher rank, after having been
deprived of the third part of their property, shall be relegated to an
island, or exiled.

​(3) Roman citizens who permit either themselves or their slaves to be
circumcised in accordance with the Jewish rite, after having had their
property confiscated, shall be relegated to an island for life; and the
physicians who performed the operation shall be put to death.^1^

​(4) If Jews circumcise slaves whom they have purchased and who belong
to another nation, they shall either be deported or capitally punished.

^1^ The rite of circumcision is of remote antiquity, and is a purely
hygienic measure, whose observance was compelled by its intimate
association with religion. It is supposed to have first been practised
by the Phoenicians, from whom the Egyptians and other nations derived
it. So important was it considered by the denizens of the Valley of the
Nile that foreigners, even residing temporarily in Egypt, were forced to
submit to its performance. Its practice is one of the cardinal precepts
of Islamism, and was well known to the people of pagan Arabia. Abraham
was ninety-nine years old when the Lord ordered him to be circumcised.
(Genesis XVII, 24) ; and so strictly was the custom observed by his
descendants that during mediæval times, when Jews occasionally
apostatized to Christianity, their coreligionists circumcised them after
death. The rite is wide spread and extends to the savage and
semi-barbarous nations of Africa, Asia, America, and Australia. Its
adoption as a sanitary precaution, confirmed by the experience of ages,
is to-day recommended by all well-informed and intelligent physicians.
It was severely punished by the Canon Law, and has always been a
favorite subject of ecclesiastical reprobation.

The extreme penalty was denounced by the Visigoths against Jews who
either performed the ceremony of circumcision, or permitted it to be
done. (For. Jud. XII, II, 7.) It was not specifically punishable at
Common Law. — ED.

TITLE XXIII. \
ON THE LEX CORNELIA HAVING REFERENCE TO ASSASSINS AND POISONERS.

​(1) The *Lex Cornelia* imposes the penalty of deportation upon anyone
who kills a man, if he does so with a weapon for the purpose of stealing
his property; or if he has in his possession, sells, or prepares poison
for the purpose of killing another; or if he gives false testimony
through which anyone might lose his life, or which might afford occasion
for his death. It has been decided that persons of superior rank who
commit crimes of this kind shall be capitally punished, and those of
inferior rank shall be crucified, or thrown to wild beasts.

​(2) ....^1^

​(3) A man who kills another is sometimes acquitted, and one who does
not kill is convicted of homicide; for the advice of everyone, and not
his mere act should be punished. Therefore, a person who intends to kill
another, but fails to perpetrate the crime on account of some fortuitous
circumstance, is punished as a homicide, and he who accidentally, and
negligently kills a man by throwing a weapon is acquitted.

​(4) ....^1^

​(5) ....^1^

​(6) ....^1^

​(7) ....^1^

​(8) It has been decided that a person who kills a robber making an
attack upon him, or any person whomsoever who attacks him for the
purpose of committing the crime against nature, cannot be punished ; for
one of them defends his life, and the other his chastity from a public
crime.

​(9) ....^1^

​(10) A judge who accepts money for a decision against the life or
property of anyone, after having been deprived of his possessions, shall
be deported to an island.

​(11) The instigators of a murder are punished as homicides.

​(12) If a person who is trimming a tree throws down a branch, and does
not give warning so that it may be avoided, and a passer-by is killed by
being struck with it, although the party responsible may not strictly
come within the provisions of the law, he shall still be sentenced to
the mines.

​(13) Any one who castrates, or procures the castration of a man against
his consent, either for the purpose of debauchery, or for reward,
whether he is a slave or a freeman, shall be punished with death.
Persons of higher rank shall be deported to an island, after their
property has been confiscated.

​(14) Persons who administer potions for the purpose of causing
abortion, or love philtres, even if they do not do so maliciously,
still, because the act affords a bad example, shall if of inferior rank,
be sentenced to the mines; if of superior rank, they shall be relegated
to an island, after having been deprived of their property. Where,
however, the man or the woman loses his or her life in consequence of
their act they shall undergo the extreme penalty.

​(15) Persons who celebrate, or cause to be celebrated impious or
nocturnal rites, so as to enchant, bewitch, or bind anyone, shall be
crucified, or thrown to wild beasts.

​(16) Anyone who sacrifices a man, or attempts to obtain auspices by
means of his blood, or pollutes a shrine or a temple, shall be thrown to
wild beasts, or, if he is of superior rank, shall be punished with
death.

​(17) It has been decided that persons who are addicted to the art of
magic, shall suffer extreme punishment; that is to say they shall be
thrown to wild beasts, or crucified. Magicians themselves shall be
burned alive.

​(18) No one shall be permitted to have books on the art of magic in his
possession, and when they are found with anyone, they shall be publicly
burnt, and those who have them, after being deprived of their property,
if they are of superior rank shall be deported to an island, and if they
are of inferior station shall be put to death; for not only is the
practice of this art prohibited, but also the knowledge of the same.

​(19) If a man dies from the effects of a drug which is administered for
the preservation of health, or as a remedy for disease, and the party
who administered it is of superior rank, he shall be relegated to an
island, and if he is of inferior station, he shall be punished
capitally.

^1^ Original manuscript illegible.

TITLE XXIV. \
ON THE LEX POMPEIA RELATING TO PARRICIDES.

​(1) He who kills his father, his mother, his grandfather, his
grandmother, his brother, his sister, his paternal or maternal uncle or
aunt, his male or female cousin, a wife, a husband, a son-in-law, a
mother-in-law, a stepfather, a step-son, a step-daughter, a patron or a
patroness, is liable under the *Lex Pompeia* having reference to
parricides. Anyone who kills his or her father or mother, grandfather or
grandmother, brother or sister, patron or patroness, although they were
formerly sewed up in a sack and thrown into the sea, are at present
burned alive, or abandoned to wild beasts.

TITLE XXV. \
ON THE LEX CORNELIA HAVING REFERENCE TO WILLS.

​(1) Anyone who knowingly and maliciously writes or reads publicly,
substitutes, suppresses, removes, re-seals, or erases a will, or any
other written instrument; and anyone who engraves a false seal, or makes
one, or impresses it, or exhibits it; and anyone who counterfeits gold
or silver money, or washes, melts, scrapes, spoils, or adulterates any
coin bearing the impression of the face of the Emperor, or refuses to
accept it, unless it is counterfeit, shall, if of superior rank, be
deported to an island, and if of inferior station, be sentenced to the
mines, or punished capitally. Slaves if manumitted after the crime has
been perpetrated, shall be crucified.

​(2) Anyone who receives or pays money for the purpose of giving false
testimony, or to suppress that which is true; or who corrupts, or
attempts to corrupt, a judge, in order to induce him either to render,
or to not render a decision, shall, if of inferior station, be punished
with death; and if of superior rank, shall be deported to an island,
along with the judge, after the confiscation of their property.

​(3) ....^1^

​(4) A judge who renders a decision in opposition to an Imperial
Constitution, or contrary to a public law which was read in his
presence, shall be deported to an island.

​(5) Anyone who knowingly and maliciously, and for the purpose of
defrauding another, erases, changes, substitutes, or signs any register,
decree, petition, public record, attestation, bond, note, or letter; or
anyone who covers brass with gold or silver, or while melting silver or
gold, substitutes brass or tin for it, shall be punished with the
penalty for forgery.

​(6) The Senate decreed that tablets containing either public or private
contracts should be signed by the witnesses summoned, in such a way that
having been perforated from the upper margin to the centre, they should
be fastened with a triple cord; and that wax seals should be impressed
upon the cord so that the writing contained therein might be preserved
unimpaired. Where a tablet is produced which is sealed in any other way
it has no force or effect.

​(7) Anyone who opens, reads publicly, or reseals, the will of a person
who is still living, is liable to the penalty imposed by the *Lex
Cornelia*; and, in general, persons of inferior station who are guilty
of this offence are condemned to the mines, and those of higher rank are
deported to an island.

​(8) When anyone proves that the contents of a legal instrument
belonging to him has been betrayed to his adversary, either by his
attorney or his agent, the said attorney or agent, if of inferior
station, shall be condemned to the mines, and if of superior rank, shall
be deprived of half his property, and relegated for life.

​(9) If anyone should reveal the contents of, or deliver any written
instrument deposited with him for safe keeping to the other party or
adversary in the case during the absence of the owner, the culprit shall
either be condemned to the mines, or relegated to an island, according
to his condition.^2^

​(10) Anyone who knowingly and maliciously makes use of forged
instruments, decrees, letters, or rescripts, shall be punished with the
penalty for forgery; that is to say, if he is of inferior station, he
shall be condemned to the mines, and if he is of superior rank, he shall
be deported to an island.

​(11) Anyone who assumes a false name, race, or parentage, for the
purpose of appropriating and possessing property belonging to another,
shall be punished under the *Lex Cornelia* relating to forgery.

​(12) Those who make use of the insignia of a higher rank than that to
which they are entitled, or pretend to belong to the army for the
purpose of terrifying or oppressing anyone; if they are of inferior
station, shall be punished with death, and if they are of superior rank
shall be deported to an island.

​(13) Where anyone by means of false representations of his friendship
or intimacy with a judge, sells his decisions, or pretends to do so
anything in his name, he shall after conviction be either relegated or
executed, according to the gravity of his offence.

^1^ Original manuscript illegible.

^2^ The betrayal of secrets by one to whom they had been entrusted was
punished by the *Partidas* with perpetual exile and the confiscation of
property. (*Las Siete Partidas* VII, VII, I, 6.) The laws of the nations
of Continental Europe on this question generally relate to privileged
communications. (*Cód*. *Pénal de France,*Art. 378; *Cód. Pénal de
España*, Arts. 512, 513; *Cod. Penale, d'ltalia*, Art. 161;
*Strafgesetzbuch für das Deutsche Reich*, Art. 300; *Wetboek van
Strafrecht*, Art. 272.) — ED.

TITLE XXVI. \
ON THE LEX JULIA RELATING TO PUBLIC AND PRIVATE VIOLENCE.

​(1) Anyone invested with authority who puts to death or orders to be
put to death, tortures, scourges, condemns, or directs a Roman citizen
who first appealed to the people, and has now appealed to the Emperor to
be publicly placed in chains, shall be condemned under the *Lex Julia*
relating to public violence. The punishment of this crime is death,
where the parties are of inferior station; deportation to an island,
where they are of superior rank.

​(2) Those are excepted from the operation of this law who exercise the
art of actors, together with those who have been tried and have
acknowledged their guilt, and persons who are ordered to be placed in
prison because they did not obey the magistrate who stated the law; and
individuals who commit acts against the public welfare; as well as
military tribunals, and the commanders of fleets and of the wings of the
army, so that military offences may be punished by them without any
impediment arising from the *Lex Julia*.

​(3) Anyone who, with the assistance of armed men, ejects or forcibly
deprives another of the possession of a villa, or a field, or besieges
or shuts him up therein, or, in order that this may be done, either
employs, hires, or leads a body of men; or sets fire to property while
in a crowd, an assembly, or a mob or during a sedition; or forbids the
funeral rites or burial of anyone to take place; or interferes with, or
disturbs funeral ceremonies; or receives, conceals, or harbors anyone
interdicted from water and fire; or who, appearing armed in public and
in company with armed men, besieges, surrounds, closes, or occupies, any
temple, gate, or other public property; is liable under the *Lex Julia*
relating to public and private violence. All persons convicted of this
offence, if they are of superior rank, shall be deprived of the third
part of their possessions and relegated to an island; if they are of
inferior station, they shall be condemned to the mines.

​(4) If a creditor, whose claim is in writing, should, without the order
of the governor, forcibly seize as a pledge any property of his debtor
which was not encumbered to him; he violates the *Lex Julia* relating to
private violence. A creditor, however, without invoking the authority of
court, is not prevented from claiming and seizing any property which was
pledged or hypothecated, and deposited with him.

TITLE XXVII. \
ON THE LEX JULIA RELATING TO PECULATION.

​(1) If anyone appropriates, steals, exchanges, or converts to his own
use money belonging to the Public Treasury, he shall be condemned to pay
fourfold the amount which he took.

TITLE XXVIII. \
ON THE LEX JULIA RELATING TO EXTORTION.

​(1) Where judges are said to have been corrupted with money, they are
generally either removed by the governor from their *curia*, or sent
into exile, or relegated for a certain time.

TITLE XXIX. \
ON THE LEX JULIA RELATING TO TREASON.

​(1) He by whose aid or advice arms have been taken up against the
Emperor or the State, or an army is led into an ambuscade; or where
anyone, without the order of the Emperor, carries on war, or enrolls, or
prepares an army, or solicits soldiers to desert the Emperor, is liable
under the *Lex Julia* relating to treason. Formerly, persons of this
kind were interdicted from water and fire for life; but now those of
inferior station are thrown to wild beasts, or burned alive, and those
of superior rank are capitally punished. This crime is not only
perpetrated by the act itself, but is aggravated by the utterance of
impious words and maledictions.

​(2) In the trial of anyone accused of treason inquiry should first be
made with what resources, as a member of what faction, and through the
instigation of what persons, he committed the offence; for a person
accused of the crime should be punished, not under the pretext of
flattering anyone, but on account of what he himself has done; hence,
when he is examined his rank will not exempt him from torture.

TITLE XXX. A. \
ON THE LEX JULIA RELATING TO CORRUPT INTRIGUING FOR OFFICE.

​(1) Where anyone desiring to obtain the office of magistrate or priest
of the province, collects a mob to secure their votes, or assembles
slaves, or calls together any other crowd of persons, he shall, if
convicted, be deported to an island as a person guilty of having
employed public violence.

TITLE XXX. B. \
ON THE LEX FAVIA.

​(1) ....^1^

​(2) ....^1^

^1^ Original manuscript illegible.

TITLE XXXI. \
CONCERNING MILITARY PUNISHMENTS.

​(1) If a soldier, through having received money, released a prisoner,
he shall be punished with death; and inquiry should certainly be made of
what offence the party released was accused.

​(2) Anyone who by means of superior force releases a prisoner from the
custody of a soldier shall be capitally punished.

TITLE XXXII. \
WHEN AN APPEAL CAN BE TAKEN.

​(1) Whenever an oath is demanded, an appeal should be taken at the time
when it is tendered, and not when it is made.

TITLE XXXIII. \
CONCERNING THE SECURITIES AND THE PENALTIES OF APPEALS.

​(1) In order that no one may have full and free right to retract and
revoke an opinion rendered, both a penalty and certain requirements with
reference to time have been imposed upon appellants. To avoid improper
appeals from being taken, the term of five days has been prescribed for
the purpose of furnishing security for the payment of a penalty in an
appeal. Therefore, a party who resides in the place where he appealed,
should furnish security so that five continuous days may be reckoned
from the day when the order was received; and if he should be at a
distance from that place, five days are allowed for the journey, and are
computed in addition to the one on which he received the order.

​(2) In order that no one may be taken unawares by the words employed in
furnishing security, it is very desirable that the penalty itself, or
some other property in its stead should be deposited; for it is not
necessary that the party should have a sponsor, or give a guarantor or a
surety, or even be present, but if judgment is rendered against him, he
will lose what he deposited.

​(3) Whenever security is given for a penalty in an appeal, one or more
sureties who are solvent may be furnished; for it is sufficient for even
one who is solvent to be provided to insure the payment of the penalty.

​(4) Where several parties appeal one bond is sufficient, and if only
one person furnishes security he provides for all.

​(5) Where an appeal is taken from several decisions separate bonds are
required, and security should be furnished for each penalty.

​(6) The amount of the penalty for which each party must furnish
security should be expressly stated in the bond, so that each one may
know who is bound by the stipulation; otherwise, security will not be
considered to have been legally given.

​(7) If a defender appeals, he should provide security for the third of
the amount involved in the case.

​(8) The better opinion is that, in all pecuniary cases, security must
be furnished for the third of the sum in question.

TITLE XXXIV. \
CONCERNING PROCEEDINGS SENT UP ON APPEAL.

​(1) Notice of proceedings sent up on appeal is served by the party who
takes the appeal on him who should be notified; which notice is commonly
called a summons, and acceptance of the same should be officially made
within five days.

​(2) A party who does not demand or receive notice of the case sent up
on appeal, or make the proper return, is barred by prescription from
proceeding further, and is compelled to pay the penalty of the appeal.

TITLE XXXV. \
CONCERNING THE RETURN OF CASES WHICH HAVE BEEN APPEALED.

​(1) We can only ourselves, in person, prosecute an appeal taken for the
purpose of establishing the condition of a party in a capital case; for
no one who is absent can either be reduced to slavery, or condemned to
death.

​(2) It has been decided that appeals made for the purpose of delay, and
those taken by avengers, and persons who have confessed, cannot be
received.

​(3) The party who appeals should not do so with abuse of the judge who
decided the case; and therefore, when it is done in this way, it shall
be punished in the discretion of the Emperor.

TITLE XXXVI. \
WHAT SHOULD BE OBSERVED AFTER AN APPEAL.

​(1) It is settled that whenever a party in possession takes an appeal
the mesne profits shall be deposited. If, however, the plaintiff appeals
the profits shall not be deposited, nor can security for them legally be
demanded.

​(2) Where an appeal is taken with reference to urban estates or slaves
their hire or wages, and the freight also (if the proceedings relate to
a ship) are usually deposited.

TITLE XXXVII. \
CONCERNING THE MERITS OF APPEALS.

​(1) It should by all means be established that, where an appeal is
decided to be unjust, not the mere amount, but fourfold the expenses
incurred by the adversary in defending the case, should be paid by the
other party.

END OF THE OPINIONS OF PAULUS.

* * * * *
