THE OPINIONS OF JULIUS PAULUS.

BOOK IV.

TITLE I. \
CONCERNING TRUSTS.

​(1) A wife to whom her husband left the dowry as a preferred legacy
cannot be charged with a trust, for the reason that she does not obtain
any pecuniary benefit from the will, but is considered merely to receive
that to which she is entitled.

​(2) A posthumous child, who has been appointed heir, can be charged
with the execution of a trust.

​(3) If the Emperor is appointed heir, he can be charged with the
payment of a legacy and the execution of a trust.

​(4) A person who is deaf or dumb, whether he receives a legacy, is
appointed an heir, or succeeds on the ground of intestacy, can legally
be charged with the execution of a trust.

​(5) Anyone who leaves a trust can charge the party to whom he leaves
it, as follows: "I request you, Gaius Seius, to be content with the said
property"; or, "Or I desire that that property be delivered to you".

​(6) We can create a trust in the following words: "I ask, I request, I
desire, I direct, I pray, I wish, I enjoin." The expressions "I desire",
and "I command" create a valid trust. The terms "I leave", and "I
recommend", do not furnish ground for an action of trust.

​(7) We can leave our own property, as well as that of others, subject
to the terms of a trust; but our own must be delivered immediately, and
that of others must either be purchased, or its value paid.

​(8) If a testator leaves property belonging to someone else, as his
own, in trust, he should not do so if he is aware that it belongs to
another, as is the practice with legacies; for the trust will be of no
force or effect.

​(9) If the testator survives, and sells the property which he
bequeathed the trust is extinguished.

​(10) A trust included in a codicil which is not confirmed by a will is
legally due.

​(11) A trust left by a father to a son, no matter in what words it is
expressed, is due according to law; for among persons who are related it
is sufficient for the intention to be stated in any words whatsoever, as
is the case with donations; and therefore a trust is considered to be
legally bequeathed even on the day before the death of the deceased.

​(12) If a trust be left, in any manner whatsoever, to take effect at
the time of the emancipation of a son, or when he becomes his own
master; he will be entitled to it when freed from paternal control.

​(13) Where children are requested to transfer an estate if they should
die without issue, and one of them dies without leaving children, the
estate will pass to the survivor; nor can the parties, with reference to
this make any agreement which is contrary to the will of the testator.

​(14) An heir cannot execute a trust before entering on the estate, or a
legatee before receiving his legacy.

​(15) If the heir should sell the property left in trust and knowingly
should purchase it, the beneficiary of the trust can still legally
demand to be placed in possession.

​(16) Whenever a trust is left to freedmen, it has been decided that it
can only belong to such as have been manumitted, or who are among the
legal number of those who have obtained their freedom under the terms of
the same will.

​(17) An heir can not only be charged with a trust involving the
property of the estate, but also with one relating to his own property.

​(18) All the rights attaching to a trust consist not in bringing an
action to recover the property, but in making a demand for it.

TITLE II. \
CONCERNING THE TREBELLIAN DECREE OF THE SENATE.

​(1) It was provided by the Trebellian Decree of the Senate that the
heir should not be burdened with all the actions which might be brought
against the estate; and therefore, whenever the estate is transferred
under the terms of a trust, the actions relating to it are also
transferred to the beneficiary, for the reason that both parties should
not be liable to loss.

TITLE III. \
CONCERNING THE PEGASIAN DECREE OP THE SENATE.

​(1) A stipulation is entered into between the heir and the beneficiary
of a trust to whom an estate is transferred under the Pegasian Decree of
the Senate, in such a way that a fourth part of the actions will lie in
favor of the appointed heir, and the remainder in favor of the
beneficiary of the trust in proportion to his share of the estate.

​(2) If the heir is asked to transfer the entire estate and is unwilling
to retain the fourth, the better opinion is that he should transfer it
under the Trebellian Decree of the Senate; for then all actions are
granted to the beneficiary of the trust.

​(3) Again, the *Lex Falcidia* and the Pegasian Decree of the Senate as
well, permit the fourth of the remainder of the estate to belong to the
heir, after the debts and the gifts to the gods have been deducted.

​(4) An heir who transfers the entire estate, and does not retain the
fourth part of it under the Pegasian Decree of the Senate, as he should
have done, cannot recover it; for he who prefers to discharge his entire
duty to the deceased is not considered to have paid something which was
not due.

TITLE IV. \
CONCERNING THE REJECTION OF AN ESTATE.

​(1) An estate can not only be refused by words but also by acts, and by
any indication of the intention whatsoever.

​(2) An heir can be compelled by municipal magistrates, under the
authority of the governor, to enter upon and transfer an estate, on the
demand of the beneficiary of the trust.

​(3) If the beneficiary alleges that the heir refuses to enter on the
estate he can demand that a decree be rendered in his absence, and that
he legally be placed in possession.

​(4) An heir who is compelled to enter on an estate which is supposed to
be insolvent, transfers all the property belonging to the same under the
Trebellian Decree of the Senate.^1^

^1^ Trusts, or bequests for the benefit of a third party, and known as
*fideicommissa*, were invented to evade the rule of law by which a Roman
citizen was prohibited from leaving property directly by will to
foreigners and other persons legally incompetent to receive it. At
first, no legal measures could be taken to enforce compliance with the
wishes of the testator, the legacy absolutely vested in the trustee who
was the testamentary heir, and was only in honor bound to carry out the
provisions of the will, so far as the beneficiary of the trust was
concerned. Violation of this moral obligation, however, occurred so
often that the Emperor Augustus declared it to be legally binding, and
provided for the enforcement of its performance. It is related of him
that he himself scrupulously observed the directions of a testator with
reference to the transfer to a beneficiary of property bequeathed for
the benefit of the latter; thus affording a laudable example for the
observance of his subjects. The consuls, and subsequently two prætors
especially appointed for that purpose, were invested with jurisdiction
over trusts. As difficulties arose in their execution, owing to the
reluctance of the heir to assume responsibilities that in many cases
were productive of no advantage, and which might result in serious loss,
various decrees of the Senate were enacted to remove these drawbacks. By
this means the heir, on the transfer of the estate, was released from
all liability, which was assumed by the beneficiary; and he was entitled
to a fourth of his share which, however, he forfeited if he refused to
enter on the estate and legal measures were required to compel him to do
so.

Trusts were either universal or special; the first involved the transfer
of an entire inheritance, the second had reference to some designated
article or a specified sum of money. An universal trust was, in its
effect, merely a kind of substitution, entirely dependent upon the
previous entry of the heir upon the estate. It was not necessary for the
heir to even accept the execution of the trust in order to transmit it
to his successors; and when certain property, which included his fourth,
was bequeathed to him, he was held to occupy the position of an ordinary
legatee. The beneficiary of a trust, as well as an heir, had the right
to reject an estate or a legacy if he thought that it would prove
burdensome, or disadvantageous.

*Fideicommissa*, which are treated under the head of Substitutions, are
recognized by nearly all the Codes of Continental Europe. They were
introduced into England under the name of "uses", during the reign of
Edward III, for the purpose of evading the Statutes of Mortmain by
enabling the clergy to enjoy the use and benefit of lands which could
not be directly devised to them. The trustee was called the feoffee to
uses, and the *fideicommissarius*, or beneficiary, the *cestuy que use*,
and afterwards the *cestuy que trust*. The Statute 15, Richard II, 2, 5,
effectively disposed of this ingenious expedient to avoid the
requirements of the law. "If any be seized of any lands or other
Possessions to the use of any Spiritual Person with purpose of Amortize
them, and whereof such Spiritual Person takes the Profits, he shall
before the Feast of St. Michael next, cause them to be Amortized by the
Licence of the King and other Lords, or dispose of them to some use;
otherwise they shall be Forfeit according to the Form of said Statute,
as Lands purchased by People of Religion; And no such Purchase to the
use of such Spiritual Person shall be hereafter made, upon like pain."
(Wingate, An Exact Abridgment of all the Statutes from the beginning of
Magna Charta, Title Mortmain, Page 433.) — ED.

TITLE V. \
CONCERNING THE COMPLAINT THAT A WILL IS INOFFICIOUS.

​(1) A will is said to be inofficious, because the children having been
improperly disinherited, it does not appear to have been drawn up in
accordance with the duty of parental affection.

​(2) When a son is born after a will has been made by his mother, and
her intention does not seem to have been changed when it could have been
done; the son can properly file a complaint for inofficiousness, as in
the case of an heir who has been passed over.

​(3) A will in which the Emperor is appointed heir can be declared
inofficious; for it is but fitting that he who makes the laws should
with equal dignity obey them.

​(4) Anyone who can allege a will to be inofficious is not prevented
from claiming the estate.

​(5) A son who is appointed heir to an entire estate cannot declare the
will to be inofficious, nor does it make any difference whether the
estate is exhausted or not, for he still will be entitled to the fourth
part of the same by the benefit of either the *Lex Falcidia* or the
Pegasian Decree of the Senate.

​(6) The fourth part of the estate, after the debts and funeral expenses
have been deducted, should be given to the children, in order that they
may be prevented from making a complaint of inofficiousness. It is
settled that grants of freedom also diminish this part.

​(7) If a son obtains less than a fourth part of the estate under the
will of his father, he can legally demand that the remainder of his
share be made good by his brothers, his co-heirs, without filing a
complaint of inofficiousness.

​(8) An agreement not to declare a will inofficious does not bar a
future complaint with reference to the will, for it has been decided
that the claims of children should be considered rather than any
agreement.

​(9) Where an heir is requested to transfer the estate, no injury is
done to the beneficiary of the trust, even though the heir might be able
to file a complaint of inofficiousness; for he only loses a fourth part
of the estate which he could have had under the terms of the Decree of
the Senate. .

​(10) If the appointed heir has a substitute, and makes a complaint of
inofficiousness but fails to gain his case, the property will not belong
to the Treasury, but to the substitute.

TITLE VI. \
CONCERNING THE TAX OF THE TWENTIETH.

​(1) A will is opened in the following manner: either all the witnesses
who attached their seals to the will, or the majority of them are
summoned, so that, having acknowledged their seals, and the cord having
been broken, the will may be opened and read, and the opportunity to
make a copy of the same may be afforded; and then, having been sealed
with the public seal, it is placed among the public records, in order
that if the copy should be destroyed, it may be known where the original
can be found.

​(2) Wills executed in provincial towns, colonies, fortified places,
prefectures, villages, castles, and places of assembly should be opened
and read in the presence of the witnesses or of respectable citizens in
the forum or the church between the second and the tenth hour of the
day. A copy having been made, the will is again sealed up in the
presence of the magistrates in whose presence it was opened.

(2a) Anyone who opens or reads a will in any other manner, or in any
other place than those required by law, is liable to a penalty of five
thousand sesterces.

​(3) The law directs a will to be opened immediately after the death of
the testator; and although this rule has been changed by rescripts,
still, under those at present in force a will should be opened within
three to five days after the death of the testator, and where the
parties are absent, within the same number of days after their return;
for this is not a matter of such importance to the heirs, legatees, or
recipients of grants of freedom, as it is that no delay should take
place in the payment of the necessary tax.

TITLE VII. \
CONCERNING THE LEX CORNELIA.

​(1) Anyone who writes, reads, substitutes, or seals a forged will, or
knowingly and maliciously suppresses one which is genuine, or removes
it, re-seals it, or destroys it, is liable to the penalty for forgery
under the *Lex Cornelia*; that is to say, he shall be deported to an
island.

​(2) Not only he who substitutes, suppresses, or destroys a will, is
punished by the penalty of the *Lex Cornelia*, but also he who knowingly
and maliciously orders this to be done, or takes care that it shall be
done.

​(3) He suppresses a will who knowingly, intentionally and for the
purpose of defrauding the heir, the legatees, the beneficiaries of a
trust, or the slaves entitled to freedom under the will does not produce
it.

​(4) He is considered to suppress a will who having it in his possession
and being able to produce it, takes care not to do so.

​(5) If a codicil is concealed and not produced, it is considered to be
suppressed.

​(6) It is provided by the Perpetual Edict^1^ that if a will is not
produced proceedings can be instituted within the year to compel its
production through an interdict, by means of which the party who
suppressed it can be forced to produce it. Where the instrument is
written either on papyrus or parchment, it comes under the head of a
will.

^1^ The Prætor was invested with extraordinary power with reference to
subjects included in his jurisdiction. His edict, inscribed upon the
"album" or "tablet" — so called from its white color — posted
conspicuously in the Forum, announced to all the formulas of practice,
and the principles which were to form the bases of his decrees for the
ensuing year. It is true that he usually adopted, with slight
modification, those promulgated by his predecessors, but he was, by no
means, obliged to do so. A new order of proceeding, other rules of
judicial conduct, were ever at his disposal, on the assumption of his
magisterial duties; provided, of course, that he could frame them, that
they were not inequitable, and did not interfere with the rights of the
litigants who appeared before him. This vast authority, which, to a
certain extent, practically conferred upon the person in whom it was
vested the privilege of legislation, was naturally liable to abuse; and
led to the enactment of the *Edictum Perpetuum*, or "Continuous Edict",
by whose provisions the Prætor was deprived of the arbitrary power to
issue new edicts arising from the circumstances of any particular case,
and was compelled to adhere to the rules which he himself had prescribed
for his guidance during his term of office. This regulation, whose
observance was originally optional with the Prætor, became compulsory
with the passage of the *Lex Cornelia*, 67 B. C.; and effectively
disposed of the *Edicta Repentina* or *Extraordinaria*, which has
reference only to individual cases, and too frequently had been inspired
by the caprice or prejudice of the occupant of the Prætorian Tribunal.

In A. D. 131, during the reign of Hadrian, the Prætorian Edict, the
interpretation and enforcement of which had previously been largely left
to the discretion of the magistrate, acquired new legal authority
through express Imperial sanction. Salvius Julianus, one of the most
renowned jurists of the age, was ordered by the Emperor to revise the
Edict as it then stood, with a view to having it enacted as a law.
During the process of revision, many changes appear to have been made,
some of them arbitrarily in accordance with the opinions of the
compiler, others at the suggestion of the Emperor himself. The result of
this was that, as strict construction and rigid application of the terms
of the Edict now became obligatory on the Prætor, his equitable
jurisdiction was greatly curtailed, often to the serious embarrassment
and hardship of litigants, who sought relief in his Court from the
severe and inflexible principles prescribed by the Civil Law. — ED.

TITLE VIII. \
CONCERNING THE SUCCESSION OF PERSONS DYING INTESTATE.

​(1) ....^2^

​(2) ....^2^

​(3) ....^2^

​(4) ....^2^

​(5) ....^2^

​(6) ... ^2^

​(7) ....^2^

​(8) ....^2^

​(9) ....^2^

​(10) ....^2^

(11)

(12)

(13)

​(14) The following difference exists between agnates and cognates,
namely, cognates are included among agnates, but agnates are not
included among cognates; and therefore a paternal uncle is both an
agnate and a cognate, but a maternal uncle is a cognate but not an
agnate. (15) (16) (17)

​(18) Where one brother is dead, his surviving brother has a living son
and there is a grandson of the deceased brother, the son of the former
will be preferred to the grandson of the latter.

(19)

​(20) The son of a brother is preferred to the son of a sister, where
the property of an intestate estate is concerned.

​(21) By the ancient Civil Law, if legal heirs merely enter upon an
estate within a hundred days the succession is transferred to the next
of kin.

​(22) Women beyond the degree of sisters are not admitted to the
succession of intestate estates; and this is considered to have been
established by the Voconian rule under the Civil Law. The Law of the
Twelve Tables, however, admits agnates without this distinction of sex.

(22a) Although women beyond the degree of sisters are not admitted to
the succession of intestate estates, they are, nevertheless, not
prevented from demanding prætorian possession on the ground of
relationship.

​(23) The rule of succession does not apply to inheritance by law, and
therefore, if a brother dies before entering on an estate, or rejects
it, the son of his brother cannot be admitted, although if the
succession were lost it would pass to the next of kin.

​(24) Anyone who is captured by the enemy and returns under the law of
*postliminium*, does not lose his right either as a proper heir or an
heir-at-law. It has been decided that the same rule shall apply to those
who have been deported to an island or sentenced to penal servitude, if,
through the indulgence of the Emperor, they are completely restored to
the enjoyment of all their rights.

​(25) To act as the heir is to assume the management of some property
belonging to an estate with the intention of afterwards claiming it; and
hence he is considered to act as an heir who arranges for the
cultivation of land belonging to an estate, and who makes use of slaves,
animals, and other property forming part of the same.

​(26) Where some of several heirs-at-law have neglected to accept an
estate, or have been prevented from entering on it for some reason or
other, those who did enter on it, or their heirs, will obtain by accrual
the shares of any who failed to do so. The rule which applies to an
appointed heir who fails to accept an estate, namely, that he can have a
substitute, is not applicable in this instance, for a difference exists
between a testamentary heir and an heir-at-law.

^2^ Original manuscript illegible.

TITLE IX. \
ON THE TREBELLIAN DECREE OF THE SENATE.

​(1) It is sufficient for mothers — and this includes not only those who
are freeborn, but also freedwomen who are Roman citizens — in order to
be entitled to the right of children, to have had children three or four
times provided the latter were born alive and after full term.

​(2) A woman who has three children at a birth is not entitled to this
right, for she did not have children three times, but is considered to
have had but one birth, unless she should have had them at intervals.

​(3) If a woman brings forth a monster or a prodigy, this is of no
avail, for creatures having forms contrary to that of the human race are
not children.

​(4) It has been decided that a mother can take advantage of a child
whose membranes serve a double purpose, for the reason that it seems, to
a certain extent, to be human.

​(5) A child born after the seventh month is an advantage to its mother
in this respect, for the rule of the Pythagorean number seems to admit
that the child appears to be mature after the seventh or the tenth
month.

​(6) An abortion or a miscarriage is not considered to constitute a
birth.

​(7) In order that a freedwoman, who is a Latin, may obtain the right
attaching to the birth of a number of children, it is sufficient if she
has had four, as in the case of a woman who is free born.

​(8) A Latin woman, who is freeborn, obtains the right of Roman
citizenship if she has had children three times and is admitted as
heir-at-law to her son, for she was not manumitted.

​(9) A mother is entitled to the right attaching to the birth of a
number of children who, either has, or has had three sons, even though
she may not have them, nor has had them. She has them when they survive,
she has had them after she has lost them; and she neither has, or has
had them, when, through the kindness of the Emperor, she obtains the
right attaching to their birth.

TITLE X. \
ON THE ORPHITIAN DECREE OF THE SENATE.

​(1) Children born of promiscuous intercourse are not prevented from
claiming the estate of their mother, if she died intestate; because, as
their estates pass to their mother so the estate of their mother should
vest in them.

​(2) Through the operation of the Claudian Decree of the Senate, the
estate of a mother who died intestate cannot pass to a daughter who is
either a female slave, or a freedwoman; because neither slaves nor
freedmen are understood to have mothers under the Civil Law.

​(3) Children who are Roman citizens, but not Latins, are admitted as
heirs-at-law to the estate of their mother who died intestate; they
must, however, be Roman citizens at the time when the intestate estate
passed to them, and could be entered on; just as when children become
certain that their mother is dead, although they have not been notified,
and it is clearly ascertained that she died intestate.

​(4) A son cannot acquire the estate of his mother as heir-at-law
without entering on the same.

TITLE XL \
CONCERNING DEGREES.

​(1) In the first degree of the ascending line are the father and the
mother; in the first degree of the descending line, are the son and the
daughter, and no other persons.

​(2) In the second degree of the ascending line are the grandfather and
the grandmother; in the second degree of the descending line are the
grandson and the granddaughter; in the collateral line are the brother
and the sister. These persons are doubled for the grandfather and
grandmother on the father's as well as the mother's side, and the
grandson and the granddaughter born of the son as well as of the
daughter, and the brother and the sister on the father's as well as the
mother's side, are included. Moreover, these persons are also doubled in
the same order and in the same manner in the succeeding degrees,
according to their positions in each degree.

​(3) In the third ascending degree are the great-grandfather and the
great-grandmother; in the third descending degree the great-grandson and
the great-granddaughter; in the collateral degree the son and the
daughter of the brother and the sister; the paternal uncle and the
paternal aunt, that is to say, the brother and sister of the father, and
the maternal uncle and the maternal aunt, that is to say, the brother
and sister of the mother.

​(4) In the fourth ascending degree are the great-great-grandfather and
the great-great-grandmother; in the fourth descending degree the
great-great-grandson and the great-great-granddaughter; in the
collateral line the grandson and the granddaughter of the brother and
the sister, the son and the daughter of the father's brother, that is,
the son and daughter of the paternal uncle, the son and daughter of the
father's sister, that is the son and daughter of the paternal aunt and
the son and daughter of the maternal aunt; although this term of
relationship is properly applied to children born of two sisters, to
which is added the great paternal uncle and the great paternal aunt,
that is, the brother and sister of the paternal grandfather; and the
great maternal uncle and the great maternal aunt, that is, the brother
and the sister of both the paternal and the maternal grandmother, and of
the maternal grandfather.

​(5) In the fifth degree in the ascending line, are included the
great-great-great-grandfather, and the great-great-great-grandmother; in
the descending line, the great-great-great-grandson, and the
great-great-great-granddaughter; in the collateral line the
great-grandson and the great-granddaughter of the brother and sister,
the paternal uncle of the brother, and the paternal uncle of the sister,
the maternal uncle of the brother, and the maternal aunt of the sister,
and their children; and then the cousins of both sexes, that is to say,
the sons and daughters of the great paternal uncle and the great
paternal aunt, and of the great maternal uncle and the great maternal
aunt. Next in order of these come the great paternal uncle and the great
paternal aunt, the brother and sister of the paternal greatgrandfather,
and the great maternal uncle and the great maternal aunt, the brother
and sister of the paternal and the maternal greatgrandfather, and the
maternal great-grandparents.

​(6) In the sixth degree in the ascending line are the
great-great-great-great-grandfather and the
great-great-great-great-grandmother; in the descending line are the
great-great-great-great-grandson and the
great-great-great-great-granddaughter, in the collateral line the
great-great-great-grandson and the great-great-great-granddaughter of
the brother and sister, the paternal uncle of the brother and sister,
the maternal uncle and aunts, and the grandson and the granddaughter of
cousins, the grandson and granddaughter of the paternal great uncle and
the paternal great aunt and of the maternal great uncle and the maternal
great aunt, that is, they are more properly called cousins, as the son
and the daughter of a cousin are also styled cousins. Next in the
collateral line come the son and the daughter of the paternal
great-great-uncle, and the paternal great-great-aunt, and of the
maternal great-great-uncle, and the maternal great-great-aunt, and the
brother and sister of the paternal and maternal great-great-grandfather;
and the brother and sister of the paternal and maternal
great-great-grandmother, and the maternal great-great-grandparents.

​(7) Those who are related in the seventh degree are not designated by
peculiar names in either the direct ascending or descending lines; but
in the collateral lines are the great-great-grandsons and the
great-great-granddaughters of the brother and sister and the cousins or
great-great-grandsons and great-great-granddaughters, and their sons and
daughters.

​(8) Only seven degrees of succession have been established, because in
the nature of things neither names can be found nor life be prolonged,
for those who succeed.

TITLE XII. \
CONCERNING MANUMISSIONS.

​(1) Where one of his owners manumits a slave held in common he does not
render him a Latin, nor still less a Roman citizen, and the share in the
slave who, if he had belonged to but one person, would have obtained
Roman citizenship, accrues to the other joint owner.

​(2) A person who is dumb and deaf cannot liberate a slave under the
wand of the Prætor; but he is not forbidden to manumit him in the
presence of friends, or by means of a letter. Moreover, in order that
the slave may obtain legal freedom, he can be excepted by his owners
from the condition of the sale.

​(3) A slave who has been subjected to torture in the presence of the
governor and does not confess any crime, can receive lawful freedom.

​(4) Where freedom is granted to a slave under the terms of a trust it
is not annulled by the act of the heir, if he puts in chains the slave
whom he was ordered to manumit.

​(5) One of the joint-owners of a slave does not prejudice his future
freedom by placing him in chains, for among similar opinions the more
merciful is preferred to the more severe. It is certainly the part of
human reason to favor the wretched, and to say that those are almost
innocent whom we cannot declare to be absolutely bad.

​(6) A creditor, or a debtor cannot, by placing a slave who has been
pledged in chains, put him in the position of an enemy who has
surrendered at discretion; for one of them cannot, without the other,
cause deterioration of the property pledged.

​(7) A slave who has been placed in chains by the order of an insane
master or one who is a minor, is not to be classed in the number of
persons who have surrendered at discretion, for the reason that neither
an insane person nor a minor is capable of exercising good judgment.

​(8) Not even if the master himself should place him in chains, will he
prejudice his right to freedom; but if he should order this to be done,
or should ratify the act of his attorney or agent who have placed him in
chains, this will not affect the prospect of his future freedom; even if
before he knew that he had been placed in chains, he should approve of
his release.

​(9) A curator cannot be appointed for a blind man, because he himself
can appoint an attorney.

TITLE XIII. \
CONCERNING GRANTS OF FREEDOM UNDER A TRUST.

​(1) Where an heir is appointed on the condition that he will emancipate
his children, he is, by all means, required to emancipate them; for in
this instance emancipation is considered to be conditional.

​(2) Where the party who has been charged with a grant of freedom under
the terms of a trust dies, his heirs should be required to bestow it.

​(3) If a person at the time of his death grants freedom to his slaves,
as follows, namely: "I wish So-and-So and So-and-So to be free, and I
appoint them guardians of my children"; the grant of freedom under the
trust will be prevented, because wards cannot manumit without the
authority of their guardian, and a guardian cannot be appointed for
those who already have one. In the meantime, however, wards are
considered as being absent, and under the Decree of the Senate freedom
can first be granted, and guardianship be established afterwards.

TITLE XIV. \
ON THE LEX FUFIA CANINIA.

​(1) Slaves can be manumitted by will only by name, according to the
*Lex Fufia*. They are understood to be properly manumitted by name when
the following forms are employed: "Let Stichus be free"; or "I desire my
steward", or "the child of my female slave to be free". By the Orphitian
Decree of the Senate freedom can be granted just as if the slave had
been mentioned by name, for the reference to his occupation and trade
makes no change in his designation, unless there are several slaves who
discharge the same duties; for then the name should be added in order
that it may be clear which one the testator seems to have meant.

​(2) Where grants of freedom mentioned in a codicil confirmed by a will
agree with those granted by the will, they are considered the most
recent because both are confirmed by it whether they precede or follow
the will in point of time.

​(3) Whenever a number of slaves is referred to on account of the *Lex
Fufia Caninia*, fugitives also, whose possession is always supposed to
be retained, should be included.

​(4) It is provided by the *Lex Fufia Caninia* that a certain number of
slaves can be manumitted by will; therefore, where two have been stolen,
half of the remainder from three to ten, can be manumitted; from ten to
thirty, the third; from thirty to a hundred, the fourth; from a hundred
to five hundred, the fifth; but it is not lawful for more than a hundred
to be manumitted from the greater number of slaves.

* * * * *
